Once, in a dry season, I wrote in large letters across two pages of a notebook that innocence ends when one is stripped of the delusion that one likes oneself. Although now, some years later, I marvel that a mind on the outs with itself should have nonetheless made painstaking record of its every tremor. I recall with embarrassing clarity the flavor of those particular ashes. It was a mater of misplaced self-respect.

I had not been elected. This failure could scarcely have been more predictable or less ambiguous (I simply did not have the grades), but I was unnerved by it; I had somehow thought myself a kind of academic Raskolnikov, curiously exempt from the cause-effect relationships which hampered others. Although even the humorless nineteen-year-old that I was must have recognized that the situation lacked real tragic stature, the day that I did to make Phi Beta kappa nonetheless marked the end of something, and innocence may well be the word for it. I lost the conviction that lights would always turn green for me, the pleasant certainty that those rather passive virtues which had won me approval as a child automatically guaranteed me not only Phi Beta Kappa keys but happiness, honor, and the love of a good man; lost a certain touching faith in the totem power of good manners, clean hair, and proved competence on the Stanford-Binet scale. To such doubtful amulets had my self-respect been pinned, and I faced myself that day with the nonplussed apprehension of someone who has come across a vampire and has no crucifix at hand.

Although to be driven back upon oneself is an uneasy affair at best, rather like trying to cross a border with borrowed credentials, it seems to me now the one condition necessary to the beginnings of real self-respect. Most of our platitudes notwithstanding, self-deception remains the most difficult deception. The tricks that work on others count for nothing in that well-lit back alley where one keeps assignations with oneself; no winning smiles will do here, no prettily drawn lists of good intentions. One shuffles flashily but in vain through ones’ marked cards the kindness done for the wrong reason, the apparent triumph which involved no real effort, the seemingly heroic act into which one had been shamed. The dismal fact is that self-respect has nothing to do with the approval of others – who are, after all, deceived easily enough; has nothing to do with reputation, which, as Rhett Butler told Scarlett O’Hara, is something people with courage can do without. ….

Patterns



     Come, said my soul,
     Such verses for my Body let us write, (for we are one,)
     That should I after return,
     Or, long, long hence, in other spheres,
     There to some group of mates the chants resuming,
     (Tallying Earth's soil, trees, winds, tumultuous waves,)
     Ever with pleas'd smile I may keep on,
     Ever and ever yet the verses owning--as, first, I here and now
     Signing for Soul and Body, set to them my name,

     Walt Whitman





BOOK I.  INSCRIPTIONS




One's-Self I Sing

  One's-self I sing, a simple separate person,
  Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse.

  Of physiology from top to toe I sing,
  Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is worthy for the Muse, I say
      the Form complete is worthier far,
  The Female equally with the Male I sing.

  Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and power,
  Cheerful, for freest action form'd under the laws divine,
  The Modern Man I sing.




As I Ponder'd in Silence

  As I ponder'd in silence,
  Returning upon my poems, considering, lingering long,
  A Phantom arose before me with distrustful aspect,
  Terrible in beauty, age, and power,
  The genius of poets of old lands,
  As to me directing like flame its eyes,
  With finger pointing to many immortal songs,
  And menacing voice, What singest thou? it said,
  Know'st thou not there is but one theme for ever-enduring bards?
  And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles,
  The making of perfect soldiers.

  Be it so, then I answer'd,
  I too haughty Shade also sing war, and a longer and greater one than any,
  Waged in my book with varying fortune, with flight, advance
      and retreat, victory deferr'd and wavering,
  (Yet methinks certain, or as good as certain, at the last,) the
      field the world,
  For life and death, for the Body and for the eternal Soul,
  Lo, I too am come, chanting the chant of battles,
  I above all promote brave soldiers.




In Cabin'd Ships at Sea

  In cabin'd ships at sea,
  The boundless blue on every side expanding,
  With whistling winds and music of the waves, the large imperious waves,
  Or some lone bark buoy'd on the dense marine,
  Where joyous full of faith, spreading white sails,
  She cleaves the ether mid the sparkle and the foam of day, or under
      many a star at night,
  By sailors young and old haply will I, a reminiscence of the land, be read,
  In full rapport at last.

  Here are our thoughts, voyagers' thoughts,
  Here not the land, firm land, alone appears, may then by them be said,
  The sky o'erarches here, we feel the undulating deck beneath our feet,
  We feel the long pulsation, ebb and flow of endless motion,
  The tones of unseen mystery, the vague and vast suggestions of the
      briny world, the liquid-flowing syllables,
  The perfume, the faint creaking of the cordage, the melancholy rhythm,
  The boundless vista and the horizon far and dim are all here,
  And this is ocean's poem.

  Then falter not O book, fulfil your destiny,
  You not a reminiscence of the land alone,
  You too as a lone bark cleaving the ether, purpos'd I know not
      whither, yet ever full of faith,
  Consort to every ship that sails, sail you!
  Bear forth to them folded my love, (dear mariners, for you I fold it
      here in every leaf;)
  Speed on my book! spread your white sails my little bark athwart the
      imperious waves,
  Chant on, sail on, bear o'er the boundless blue from me to every sea,
  This song for mariners and all their ships.




To Foreign Lands

  I heard that you ask'd for something to prove this puzzle the New World,
  And to define America, her athletic Democracy,
  Therefore I send you my poems that you behold in them what you wanted.




To a Historian

  You who celebrate bygones,
  Who have explored the outward, the surfaces of the races, the life
      that has exhibited itself,
  Who have treated of man as the creature of politics, aggregates,
      rulers and priests,
  I, habitan of the Alleghanies, treating of him as he is in himself
      in his own rights,
  Pressing the pulse of the life that has seldom exhibited itself,
      (the great pride of man in himself,)
  Chanter of Personality, outlining what is yet to be,
  I project the history of the future.




To Thee Old Cause

  To thee old cause!
  Thou peerless, passionate, good cause,
  Thou stern, remorseless, sweet idea,
  Deathless throughout the ages, races, lands,
  After a strange sad war, great war for thee,
  (I think all war through time was really fought, and ever will be
      really fought, for thee,)
  These chants for thee, the eternal march of thee.

  (A war O soldiers not for itself alone,
  Far, far more stood silently waiting behind, now to advance in this book.)

  Thou orb of many orbs!
  Thou seething principle! thou well-kept, latent germ! thou centre!
  Around the idea of thee the war revolving,
  With all its angry and vehement play of causes,
  (With vast results to come for thrice a thousand years,)
  These recitatives for thee,--my book and the war are one,
  Merged in its spirit I and mine, as the contest hinged on thee,
  As a wheel on its axis turns, this book unwitting to itself,
  Around the idea of thee.




Eidolons

       I met a seer,
  Passing the hues and objects of the world,
  The fields of art and learning, pleasure, sense,
       To glean eidolons.

       Put in thy chants said he,
  No more the puzzling hour nor day, nor segments, parts, put in,
  Put first before the rest as light for all and entrance-song of all,
       That of eidolons.

       Ever the dim beginning,
  Ever the growth, the rounding of the circle,
  Ever the summit and the merge at last, (to surely start again,)
       Eidolons! eidolons!

       Ever the mutable,
  Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,
  Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,
       Issuing eidolons.

       Lo, I or you,
  Or woman, man, or state, known or unknown,
  We seeming solid wealth, strength, beauty build,
       But really build eidolons.

       The ostent evanescent,
  The substance of an artist's mood or savan's studies long,
  Or warrior's, martyr's, hero's toils,
       To fashion his eidolon.

       Of every human life,
  (The units gather'd, posted, not a thought, emotion, deed, left out,)
  The whole or large or small summ'd, added up,
       In its eidolon.

       The old, old urge,
  Based on the ancient pinnacles, lo, newer, higher pinnacles,
  From science and the modern still impell'd,
       The old, old urge, eidolons.

       The present now and here,
  America's busy, teeming, intricate whirl,
  Of aggregate and segregate for only thence releasing,
       To-day's eidolons.

       These with the past,
  Of vanish'd lands, of all the reigns of kings across the sea,
  Old conquerors, old campaigns, old sailors' voyages,
       Joining eidolons.

       Densities, growth, facades,
  Strata of mountains, soils, rocks, giant trees,
  Far-born, far-dying, living long, to leave,
       Eidolons everlasting.

       Exalte, rapt, ecstatic,
  The visible but their womb of birth,
  Of orbic tendencies to shape and shape and shape,
       The mighty earth-eidolon.

       All space, all time,
  (The stars, the terrible perturbations of the suns,
  Swelling, collapsing, ending, serving their longer, shorter use,)
       Fill'd with eidolons only.

       The noiseless myriads,
  The infinite oceans where the rivers empty,
  The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,
       The true realities, eidolons.

       Not this the world,
  Nor these the universes, they the universes,
  Purport and end, ever the permanent life of life,
       Eidolons, eidolons.

       Beyond thy lectures learn'd professor,
  Beyond thy telescope or spectroscope observer keen, beyond all mathematics,
  Beyond the doctor's surgery, anatomy, beyond the chemist with his chemistry,
       The entities of entities, eidolons.

       Unfix'd yet fix'd,
  Ever shall be, ever have been and are,
  Sweeping the present to the infinite future,
       Eidolons, eidolons, eidolons.

       The prophet and the bard,
  Shall yet maintain themselves, in higher stages yet,
  Shall mediate to the Modern, to Democracy, interpret yet to them,
       God and eidolons.

       And thee my soul,
  Joys, ceaseless exercises, exaltations,
  Thy yearning amply fed at last, prepared to meet,
       Thy mates, eidolons.

       Thy body permanent,
  The body lurking there within thy body,
  The only purport of the form thou art, the real I myself,
       An image, an eidolon.

       Thy very songs not in thy songs,
  No special strains to sing, none for itself,
  But from the whole resulting, rising at last and floating,
       A round full-orb'd eidolon.




For Him I Sing

  For him I sing,
  I raise the present on the past,
  (As some perennial tree out of its roots, the present on the past,)
  With time and space I him dilate and fuse the immortal laws,
  To make himself by them the law unto himself.




When I Read the Book

  When I read the book, the biography famous,
  And is this then (said I) what the author calls a man's life?
  And so will some one when I am dead and gone write my life?
  (As if any man really knew aught of my life,
  Why even I myself I often think know little or nothing of my real life,
  Only a few hints, a few diffused faint clews and indirections
  I seek for my own use to trace out here.)




Beginning My Studies

  Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much,
  The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion,
  The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love,
  The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much,
  I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther,
  But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs.




Beginners

  How they are provided for upon the earth, (appearing at intervals,)
  How dear and dreadful they are to the earth,
  How they inure to themselves as much as to any--what a paradox
      appears their age,
  How people respond to them, yet know them not,
  How there is something relentless in their fate all times,
  How all times mischoose the objects of their adulation and reward,
  And how the same inexorable price must still be paid for the same
      great purchase.




To the States

  To the States or any one of them, or any city of the States, Resist
      much, obey little,
  Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved,
  Once fully enslaved, no nation, state, city of this earth, ever
      afterward resumes its liberty.




On Journeys Through the States

  On journeys through the States we start,
  (Ay through the world, urged by these songs,
  Sailing henceforth to every land, to every sea,)
  We willing learners of all, teachers of all, and lovers of all.

  We have watch'd the seasons dispensing themselves and passing on,
  And have said, Why should not a man or woman do as much as the
      seasons, and effuse as much?

  We dwell a while in every city and town,
  We pass through Kanada, the North-east, the vast valley of the
      Mississippi, and the Southern States,
  We confer on equal terms with each of the States,
  We make trial of ourselves and invite men and women to hear,
  We say to ourselves, Remember, fear not, be candid, promulge the
      body and the soul,
  Dwell a while and pass on, be copious, temperate, chaste, magnetic,
  And what you effuse may then return as the seasons return,
  And may be just as much as the seasons.




To a Certain Cantatrice

  Here, take this gift,
  I was reserving it for some hero, speaker, or general,
  One who should serve the good old cause, the great idea, the
      progress and freedom of the race,
  Some brave confronter of despots, some daring rebel;
  But I see that what I was reserving belongs to you just as much as to any.




Me Imperturbe

  Me imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,
  Master of all or mistress of all, aplomb in the midst of irrational things,
  Imbued as they, passive, receptive, silent as they,
  Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles, crimes, less
      important than I thought,
  Me toward the Mexican sea, or in the Mannahatta or the Tennessee,
      or far north or inland,
  A river man, or a man of the woods or of any farm-life of these
      States or of the coast, or the lakes or Kanada,
  Me wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced for contingencies,
  To confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as
      the trees and animals do.




Savantism

  Thither as I look I see each result and glory retracing itself and
      nestling close, always obligated,
  Thither hours, months, years--thither trades, compacts,
      establishments, even the most minute,
  Thither every-day life, speech, utensils, politics, persons, estates;
  Thither we also, I with my leaves and songs, trustful, admirant,
  As a father to his father going takes his children along with him.




The Ship Starting

  Lo, the unbounded sea,
  On its breast a ship starting, spreading all sails, carrying even
      her moonsails.
  The pennant is flying aloft as she speeds she speeds so stately--
      below emulous waves press forward,
  They surround the ship with shining curving motions and foam.




I Hear America Singing

  I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear,
  Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong,
  The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam,
  The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work,
  The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand
      singing on the steamboat deck,
  The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as
      he stands,
  The wood-cutter's song, the ploughboy's on his way in the morning,
      or at noon intermission or at sundown,
  The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work,
      or of the girl sewing or washing,
  Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else,
  The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young
      fellows, robust, friendly,
  Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.




What Place Is Besieged?

  What place is besieged, and vainly tries to raise the siege?
  Lo, I send to that place a commander, swift, brave, immortal,
  And with him horse and foot, and parks of artillery,
  And artillery-men, the deadliest that ever fired gun.




Still Though the One I Sing

  Still though the one I sing,
  (One, yet of contradictions made,) I dedicate to Nationality,
  I leave in him revolt, (O latent right of insurrection! O
      quenchless, indispensable fire!)




Shut Not Your Doors

  Shut not your doors to me proud libraries,
  For that which was lacking on all your well-fill'd shelves, yet
      needed most, I bring,
  Forth from the war emerging, a book I have made,
  The words of my book nothing, the drift of it every thing,
  A book separate, not link'd with the rest nor felt by the intellect,
  But you ye untold latencies will thrill to every page.




Poets to Come

  Poets to come! orators, singers, musicians to come!
  Not to-day is to justify me and answer what I am for,
  But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental, greater than
      before known,
  Arouse! for you must justify me.

  I myself but write one or two indicative words for the future,
  I but advance a moment only to wheel and hurry back in the darkness.

  I am a man who, sauntering along without fully stopping, turns a
      casual look upon you and then averts his face,
  Leaving it to you to prove and define it,
  Expecting the main things from you.




To You

  Stranger, if you passing meet me and desire to speak to me, why
      should you not speak to me?
  And why should I not speak to you?




Thou Reader

  Thou reader throbbest life and pride and love the same as I,
  Therefore for thee the following chants.




BOOK II


Starting from Paumanok

       1
  Starting from fish-shape Paumanok where I was born,
  Well-begotten, and rais'd by a perfect mother,
  After roaming many lands, lover of populous pavements,
  Dweller in Mannahatta my city, or on southern savannas,
  Or a soldier camp'd or carrying my knapsack and gun, or a miner
      in California,
  Or rude in my home in Dakota's woods, my diet meat, my drink from
      the spring,
  Or withdrawn to muse and meditate in some deep recess,
  Far from the clank of crowds intervals passing rapt and happy,
  Aware of the fresh free giver the flowing Missouri, aware of
      mighty Niagara,
  Aware of the buffalo herds grazing the plains, the hirsute and
      strong-breasted bull,
  Of earth, rocks, Fifth-month flowers experienced, stars, rain, snow,
      my amaze,
  Having studied the mocking-bird's tones and the flight of the
      mountain-hawk,
  And heard at dawn the unrivall'd one, the hermit thrush from the
      swamp-cedars,
  Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New World.

       2
  Victory, union, faith, identity, time,
  The indissoluble compacts, riches, mystery,
  Eternal progress, the kosmos, and the modern reports.
  This then is life,
  Here is what has come to the surface after so many throes and convulsions.

  How curious! how real!
  Underfoot the divine soil, overhead the sun.

  See revolving the globe,
  The ancestor-continents away group'd together,
  The present and future continents north and south, with the isthmus
      between.

  See, vast trackless spaces,
  As in a dream they change, they swiftly fill,
  Countless masses debouch upon them,
  They are now cover'd with the foremost people, arts, institutions, known.

  See, projected through time,
  For me an audience interminable.

  With firm and regular step they wend, they never stop,
  Successions of men, Americanos, a hundred millions,
  One generation playing its part and passing on,
  Another generation playing its part and passing on in its turn,
  With faces turn'd sideways or backward towards me to listen,
  With eyes retrospective towards me.

       3
  Americanos! conquerors! marches humanitarian!
  Foremost! century marches! Libertad! masses!
  For you a programme of chants.

  Chants of the prairies,
  Chants of the long-running Mississippi, and down to the Mexican sea,
  Chants of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota,
  Chants going forth from the centre from Kansas, and thence equidistant,
  Shooting in pulses of fire ceaseless to vivify all.

       4
  Take my leaves America, take them South and take them North,
  Make welcome for them everywhere, for they are your own off-spring,
  Surround them East and West, for they would surround you,
  And you precedents, connect lovingly with them, for they connect
      lovingly with you.

  I conn'd old times,
  I sat studying at the feet of the great masters,
  Now if eligible O that the great masters might return and study me.

  In the name of these States shall I scorn the antique?
  Why these are the children of the antique to justify it.

       5
  Dead poets, philosophs, priests,
  Martyrs, artists, inventors, governments long since,
  Language-shapers on other shores,
  Nations once powerful, now reduced, withdrawn, or desolate,
  I dare not proceed till I respectfully credit what you have left
      wafted hither,
  I have perused it, own it is admirable, (moving awhile among it,)
  Think nothing can ever be greater, nothing can ever deserve more
      than it deserves,
  Regarding it all intently a long while, then dismissing it,
  I stand in my place with my own day here.

  Here lands female and male,
  Here the heir-ship and heiress-ship of the world, here the flame of
      materials,
  Here spirituality the translatress, the openly-avow'd,
  The ever-tending, the finale of visible forms,
  The satisfier, after due long-waiting now advancing,
  Yes here comes my mistress the soul.

       6
  The soul,
  Forever and forever--longer than soil is brown and solid--longer
      than water ebbs and flows.
  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they are to be the
      most spiritual poems,
  And I will make the poems of my body and of mortality,
  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems of my soul and
      of immortality.

  I will make a song for these States that no one State may under any
      circumstances be subjected to another State,
  And I will make a song that there shall be comity by day and by
      night between all the States, and between any two of them,
  And I will make a song for the ears of the President, full of
      weapons with menacing points,
  And behind the weapons countless dissatisfied faces;
  And a song make I of the One form'd out of all,
  The fang'd and glittering One whose head is over all,
  Resolute warlike One including and over all,
  (However high the head of any else that head is over all.)

  I will acknowledge contemporary lands,
  I will trail the whole geography of the globe and salute courteously
      every city large and small,
  And employments! I will put in my poems that with you is heroism
      upon land and sea,
  And I will report all heroism from an American point of view.

  I will sing the song of companionship,
  I will show what alone must finally compact these,
  I believe these are to found their own ideal of manly love,
      indicating it in me,
  I will therefore let flame from me the burning fires that were
      threatening to consume me,
  I will lift what has too long kept down those smouldering fires,
  I will give them complete abandonment,
  I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of love,
  For who but I should understand love with all its sorrow and joy?
  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?

       7
  I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races,
  I advance from the people in their own spirit,
  Here is what sings unrestricted faith.

  Omnes! omnes! let others ignore what they may,
  I make the poem of evil also, I commemorate that part also,
  I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation is--and I say
      there is in fact no evil,
  (Or if there is I say it is just as important to you, to the land or
      to me, as any thing else.)

  I too, following many and follow'd by many, inaugurate a religion, I
      descend into the arena,
  (It may be I am destin'd to utter the loudest cries there, the
      winner's pealing shouts,
  Who knows? they may rise from me yet, and soar above every thing.)

  Each is not for its own sake,
  I say the whole earth and all the stars in the sky are for religion's sake.

  I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough,
  None has ever yet adored or worship'd half enough,
  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and how certain
      the future is.

  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of these States must be
      their religion,
  Otherwise there is just no real and permanent grandeur;
  (Nor character nor life worthy the name without religion,
  Nor land nor man or woman without religion.)

       8
  What are you doing young man?
  Are you so earnest, so given up to literature, science, art, amours?
  These ostensible realities, politics, points?
  Your ambition or business whatever it may be?

  It is well--against such I say not a word, I am their poet also,
  But behold! such swiftly subside, burnt up for religion's sake,
  For not all matter is fuel to heat, impalpable flame, the essential
      life of the earth,
  Any more than such are to religion.

       9
  What do you seek so pensive and silent?
  What do you need camerado?
  Dear son do you think it is love?

  Listen dear son--listen America, daughter or son,
  It is a painful thing to love a man or woman to excess, and yet it
      satisfies, it is great,
  But there is something else very great, it makes the whole coincide,
  It, magnificent, beyond materials, with continuous hands sweeps and
      provides for all.

       10
  Know you, solely to drop in the earth the germs of a greater religion,
  The following chants each for its kind I sing.

  My comrade!
  For you to share with me two greatnesses, and a third one rising
      inclusive and more resplendent,
  The greatness of Love and Democracy, and the greatness of Religion.

  Melange mine own, the unseen and the seen,
  Mysterious ocean where the streams empty,
  Prophetic spirit of materials shifting and flickering around me,
  Living beings, identities now doubtless near us in the air that we
      know not of,
  Contact daily and hourly that will not release me,
  These selecting, these in hints demanded of me.

  Not he with a daily kiss onward from childhood kissing me,
  Has winded and twisted around me that which holds me to him,
  Any more than I am held to the heavens and all the spiritual world,
  After what they have done to me, suggesting themes.

  O such themes--equalities! O divine average!
  Warblings under the sun, usher'd as now, or at noon, or setting,
  Strains musical flowing through ages, now reaching hither,
  I take to your reckless and composite chords, add to them, and
      cheerfully pass them forward.

       11
  As I have walk'd in Alabama my morning walk,
  I have seen where the she-bird the mocking-bird sat on her nest in
      the briers hatching her brood.

  I have seen the he-bird also,
  I have paus'd to hear him near at hand inflating his throat and
      joyfully singing.

  And while I paus'd it came to me that what he really sang for was
      not there only,
  Nor for his mate nor himself only, nor all sent back by the echoes,
  But subtle, clandestine, away beyond,
  A charge transmitted and gift occult for those being born.

       12
  Democracy! near at hand to you a throat is now inflating itself and
      joyfully singing.

  Ma femme! for the brood beyond us and of us,
  For those who belong here and those to come,
  I exultant to be ready for them will now shake out carols stronger
      and haughtier than have ever yet been heard upon earth.

  I will make the songs of passion to give them their way,
  And your songs outlaw'd offenders, for I scan you with kindred eyes,
      and carry you with me the same as any.

  I will make the true poem of riches,
  To earn for the body and the mind whatever adheres and goes forward
      and is not dropt by death;
  I will effuse egotism and show it underlying all, and I will be the
      bard of personality,
  And I will show of male and female that either is but the equal of
      the other,
  And organs and acts! do you concentrate in me, for I am determin'd
      to tell you with courageous clear voice to prove you illustrious,
  And I will show that there is no imperfection in the present, and
      can be none in the future,
  And I will show that whatever happens to anybody it may be turn'd to
      beautiful results,
  And I will show that nothing can happen more beautiful than death,
  And I will thread a thread through my poems that time and events are
      compact,
  And that all the things of the universe are perfect miracles, each
      as profound as any.

  I will not make poems with reference to parts,
  But I will make poems, songs, thoughts, with reference to ensemble,
  And I will not sing with reference to a day, but with reference to
      all days,
  And I will not make a poem nor the least part of a poem but has
      reference to the soul,
  Because having look'd at the objects of the universe, I find there
      is no one nor any particle of one but has reference to the soul.

       13
  Was somebody asking to see the soul?
  See, your own shape and countenance, persons, substances, beasts,
      the trees, the running rivers, the rocks and sands.

  All hold spiritual joys and afterwards loosen them;
  How can the real body ever die and be buried?

  Of your real body and any man's or woman's real body,
  Item for item it will elude the hands of the corpse-cleaners and
      pass to fitting spheres,
  Carrying what has accrued to it from the moment of birth to the
      moment of death.

  Not the types set up by the printer return their impression, the
      meaning, the main concern,
  Any more than a man's substance and life or a woman's substance and
      life return in the body and the soul,
  Indifferently before death and after death.

  Behold, the body includes and is the meaning, the main concern and
      includes and is the soul;
  Whoever you are, how superb and how divine is your body, or any part
      of it!

       14
  Whoever you are, to you endless announcements!

  Daughter of the lands did you wait for your poet?
  Did you wait for one with a flowing mouth and indicative hand?
  Toward the male of the States, and toward the female of the States,
  Exulting words, words to Democracy's lands.

  Interlink'd, food-yielding lands!
  Land of coal and iron! land of gold! land of cotton, sugar, rice!
  Land of wheat, beef, pork! land of wool and hemp! land of the apple
      and the grape!
  Land of the pastoral plains, the grass-fields of the world! land of
      those sweet-air'd interminable plateaus!
  Land of the herd, the garden, the healthy house of adobie!
  Lands where the north-west Columbia winds, and where the south-west
      Colorado winds!
  Land of the eastern Chesapeake! land of the Delaware!
  Land of Ontario, Erie, Huron, Michigan!
  Land of the Old Thirteen! Massachusetts land! land of Vermont and
      Connecticut!
  Land of the ocean shores! land of sierras and peaks!
  Land of boatmen and sailors! fishermen's land!
  Inextricable lands! the clutch'd together! the passionate ones!
  The side by side! the elder and younger brothers! the bony-limb'd!
  The great women's land! the feminine! the experienced sisters and
      the inexperienced sisters!
  Far breath'd land! Arctic braced! Mexican breez'd! the diverse! the
      compact!
  The Pennsylvanian! the Virginian! the double Carolinian!
  O all and each well-loved by me! my intrepid nations! O I at any
      rate include you all with perfect love!
  I cannot be discharged from you! not from one any sooner than another!
  O death! O for all that, I am yet of you unseen this hour with
      irrepressible love,
  Walking New England, a friend, a traveler,
  Splashing my bare feet in the edge of the summer ripples on
      Paumanok's sands,
  Crossing the prairies, dwelling again in Chicago, dwelling in every town,
  Observing shows, births, improvements, structures, arts,
  Listening to orators and oratresses in public halls,
  Of and through the States as during life, each man and woman my neighbor,
  The Louisianian, the Georgian, as near to me, and I as near to him and her,
  The Mississippian and Arkansian yet with me, and I yet with any of them,
  Yet upon the plains west of the spinal river, yet in my house of adobie,
  Yet returning eastward, yet in the Seaside State or in Maryland,
  Yet Kanadian cheerily braving the winter, the snow and ice welcome to me,
  Yet a true son either of Maine or of the Granite State, or the
      Narragansett Bay State, or the Empire State,
  Yet sailing to other shores to annex the same, yet welcoming every
      new brother,
  Hereby applying these leaves to the new ones from the hour they
      unite with the old ones,
  Coming among the new ones myself to be their companion and equal,
      coming personally to you now,
  Enjoining you to acts, characters, spectacles, with me.

       15
  With me with firm holding, yet haste, haste on.
  For your life adhere to me,
  (I may have to be persuaded many times before I consent to give
      myself really to you, but what of that?
  Must not Nature be persuaded many times?)

  No dainty dolce affettuoso I,
  Bearded, sun-burnt, gray-neck'd, forbidding, I have arrived,
  To be wrestled with as I pass for the solid prizes of the universe,
  For such I afford whoever can persevere to win them.

       16
  On my way a moment I pause,
  Here for you! and here for America!
  Still the present I raise aloft, still the future of the States I
      harbinge glad and sublime,
  And for the past I pronounce what the air holds of the red aborigines.

  The red aborigines,
  Leaving natural breaths, sounds of rain and winds, calls as of birds
      and animals in the woods, syllabled to us for names,
  Okonee, Koosa, Ottawa, Monongahela, Sauk, Natchez, Chattahoochee,
      Kaqueta, Oronoco,
  Wabash, Miami, Saginaw, Chippewa, Oshkosh, Walla-Walla,
  Leaving such to the States they melt, they depart, charging the
      water and the land with names.

       17
  Expanding and swift, henceforth,
  Elements, breeds, adjustments, turbulent, quick and audacious,
  A world primal again, vistas of glory incessant and branching,
  A new race dominating previous ones and grander far, with new contests,
  New politics, new literatures and religions, new inventions and arts.

  These, my voice announcing--I will sleep no more but arise,
  You oceans that have been calm within me! how I feel you,
      fathomless, stirring, preparing unprecedented waves and storms.

       18
  See, steamers steaming through my poems,
  See, in my poems immigrants continually coming and landing,
  See, in arriere, the wigwam, the trail, the hunter's hut, the flat-boat,
      the maize-leaf, the claim, the rude fence, and the backwoods village,
  See, on the one side the Western Sea and on the other the Eastern Sea,
      how they advance and retreat upon my poems as upon their own shores,
  See, pastures and forests in my poems--see, animals wild and tame--see,
      beyond the Kaw, countless herds of buffalo feeding on short curly grass,
  See, in my poems, cities, solid, vast, inland, with paved streets,
      with iron and stone edifices, ceaseless vehicles, and commerce,
  See, the many-cylinder'd steam printing-press--see, the electric
      telegraph stretching across the continent,
  See, through Atlantica's depths pulses American Europe reaching,
      pulses of Europe duly return'd,
  See, the strong and quick locomotive as it departs, panting, blowing
      the steam-whistle,
  See, ploughmen ploughing farms--see, miners digging mines--see,
      the numberless factories,
  See, mechanics busy at their benches with tools--see from among them
      superior judges, philosophs, Presidents, emerge, drest in
      working dresses,
  See, lounging through the shops and fields of the States, me
      well-belov'd, close-held by day and night,
  Hear the loud echoes of my songs there--read the hints come at last.

       19
  O camerado close! O you and me at last, and us two only.
  O a word to clear one's path ahead endlessly!
  O something ecstatic and undemonstrable! O music wild!
  O now I triumph--and you shall also;
  O hand in hand--O wholesome pleasure--O one more desirer and lover!
  O to haste firm holding--to haste, haste on with me.




BOOK III


Song of Myself

       1
  I celebrate myself, and sing myself,
  And what I assume you shall assume,
  For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.

  I loafe and invite my soul,
  I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass.

  My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this soil, this air,
  Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their
      parents the same,
  I, now thirty-seven years old in perfect health begin,
  Hoping to cease not till death.

  Creeds and schools in abeyance,
  Retiring back a while sufficed at what they are, but never forgotten,
  I harbor for good or bad, I permit to speak at every hazard,
  Nature without check with original energy.

       2
  Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with
      perfumes,
  I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it,
  The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.

  The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the
      distillation, it is odorless,
  It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,
  I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,
  I am mad for it to be in contact with me.

  The smoke of my own breath,
  Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine,
  My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing
      of blood and air through my lungs,
  The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and
      dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,

  The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of
      the wind,
  A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,
  The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,
  The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields
      and hill-sides,
  The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising
      from bed and meeting the sun.

  Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?
  Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?
  Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?

  Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of
      all poems,
  You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions
      of suns left,)
  You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through
      the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,
  You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me,
  You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self.

       3
  I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the
      beginning and the end,
  But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.

  There was never any more inception than there is now,
  Nor any more youth or age than there is now,
  And will never be any more perfection than there is now,
  Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.

  Urge and urge and urge,
  Always the procreant urge of the world.

  Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and
      increase, always,
  Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life.
  To elaborate is no avail, learn'd and unlearn'd feel that it is so.

  Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well
      entretied, braced in the beams,
  Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,
  I and this mystery here we stand.

  Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.

  Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen,
  Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.

  Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age,
  Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they
      discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself.

  Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,
  Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be
      less familiar than the rest.

  I am satisfied--I see, dance, laugh, sing;
  As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night,
      and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread,
  Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels swelling the house with
      their plenty,
  Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,
  That they turn from gazing after and down the road,
  And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,
  Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead?

       4
  Trippers and askers surround me,
  People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and
      city I live in, or the nation,
  The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new,
  My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,
  The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,
  The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss
      or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations,
  Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news,
      the fitful events;
  These come to me days and nights and go from me again,
  But they are not the Me myself.

  Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,
  Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary,
  Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest,
  Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next,
  Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it.

  Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with
      linguists and contenders,
  I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait.

       5
  I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you,
  And you must not be abased to the other.

  Loafe with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat,
  Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not
      even the best,
  Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.

  I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning,
  How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn'd over upon me,
  And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue
      to my bare-stript heart,
  And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you held my feet.

  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass
      all the argument of the earth,
  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,
  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,
  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women
      my sisters and lovers,
  And that a kelson of the creation is love,
  And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,
  And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,
  And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heap'd stones, elder, mullein and
      poke-weed.

       6
  A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;
  How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.

  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green
      stuff woven.

  Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,
  A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,
  Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners, that we may see
      and remark, and say Whose?

  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.

  Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,
  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,
  Growing among folks as among white,
  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I
      receive them the same.

  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.

  Tenderly will I use you curling grass,
  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,
  It may be if I had known them I would have loved them,
  It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken soon out
      of their mothers' laps,
  And here you are the mothers' laps.

  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,
  Darker than the colorless beards of old men,
  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.

  O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,
  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing.

  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,
  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken
      soon out of their laps.

  What do you think has become of the young and old men?
  And what do you think has become of the women and children?

  They are alive and well somewhere,
  The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,
  And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the
      end to arrest it,
  And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.

  All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,
  And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.

       7
  Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?
  I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.

  I pass death with the dying and birth with the new-wash'd babe, and
      am not contain'd between my hat and boots,
  And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good,
  The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.

  I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,
  I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and
      fathomless as myself,
  (They do not know how immortal, but I know.)

  Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female,
  For me those that have been boys and that love women,
  For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,
  For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the
      mothers of mothers,
  For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,
  For me children and the begetters of children.

  Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,
  I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,
  And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away.

       8
  The little one sleeps in its cradle,
  I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies
      with my hand.

  The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,
  I peeringly view them from the top.

  The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom,
  I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair, I note where the pistol
      has fallen.

  The blab of the pave, tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of
      the promenaders,
  The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the
      clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,
  The snow-sleighs, clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snow-balls,
  The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd mobs,
  The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside borne to the hospital,
  The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,
  The excited crowd, the policeman with his star quickly working his
      passage to the centre of the crowd,
  The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,
  What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall sunstruck or in fits,
  What exclamations of women taken suddenly who hurry home and
      give birth to babes,
  What living and buried speech is always vibrating here, what howls
      restrain'd by decorum,
  Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances,
      rejections with convex lips,
  I mind them or the show or resonance of them--I come and I depart.

       9
  The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready,
  The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon,
  The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged,
  The armfuls are pack'd to the sagging mow.

  I am there, I help, I came stretch'd atop of the load,
  I felt its soft jolts, one leg reclined on the other,
  I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and timothy,
  And roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps.

       10
  Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,
  Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,
  In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,
  Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill'd game,
  Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves with my dog and gun by my side.

  The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails, she cuts the sparkle and scud,
  My eyes settle the land, I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.

  The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me,
  I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time;
  You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.

  I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west,
      the bride was a red girl,
  Her father and his friends sat near cross-legged and dumbly smoking,
      they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets
      hanging from their shoulders,
  On a bank lounged the trapper, he was drest mostly in skins, his luxuriant
      beard and curls protected his neck, he held his bride by the hand,
  She had long eyelashes, her head was bare, her coarse straight locks
      descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.

  The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside,
  I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile,
  Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak,
  And went where he sat on a log and led him in and assured him,
  And brought water and fill'd a tub for his sweated body and bruis'd feet,
  And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and gave him some
      coarse clean clothes,
  And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,
  And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;
  He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass'd north,
  I had him sit next me at table, my fire-lock lean'd in the corner.

       11
  Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore,
  Twenty-eight young men and all so friendly;
  Twenty-eight years of womanly life and all so lonesome.

  She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,
  She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.

  Which of the young men does she like the best?
  Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.

  Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,
  You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.

  Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather,
  The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.

  The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it ran from their long hair,
  Little streams pass'd all over their bodies.

  An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies,
  It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs.

  The young men float on their backs, their white bellies bulge to the
      sun, they do not ask who seizes fast to them,
  They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch,
  They do not think whom they souse with spray.

       12
  The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife
      at the stall in the market,
  I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and break-down.

  Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,
  Each has his main-sledge, they are all out, there is a great heat in
      the fire.

  From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their movements,
  The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms,
  Overhand the hammers swing, overhand so slow, overhand so sure,
  They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.

       13
  The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses, the block swags
      underneath on its tied-over chain,
  The negro that drives the long dray of the stone-yard, steady and
      tall he stands pois'd on one leg on the string-piece,
  His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast and loosens over
      his hip-band,
  His glance is calm and commanding, he tosses the slouch of his hat
      away from his forehead,
  The sun falls on his crispy hair and mustache, falls on the of
      his polish'd and perfect limbs.

  I behold the picturesque giant and love him, and I do not stop there,
  I go with the team also.

  In me the caresser of life wherever moving, backward as well as
      forward sluing,
  To niches aside and junior bending, not a person or object missing,
  Absorbing all to myself and for this song.

  Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain or halt in the leafy shade, what
      is that you express in your eyes?
  It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life.

  My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck on my distant and
      day-long ramble,
  They rise together, they slowly circle around.

  I believe in those wing'd purposes,
  And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within me,
  And consider green and violet and the tufted crown intentional,
  And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else,
  And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me,
  And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me.

       14
  The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night,
  Ya-honk he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation,
  The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listening close,
  Find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.

  The sharp-hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the
      chickadee, the prairie-dog,
  The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,
  The brood of the turkey-hen and she with her half-spread wings,
  I see in them and myself the same old law.

  The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections,
  They scorn the best I can do to relate them.

  I am enamour'd of growing out-doors,
  Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,
  Of the builders and steerers of ships and the wielders of axes and
      mauls, and the drivers of horses,
  I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.

  What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,
  Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,
  Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,
  Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,
  Scattering it freely forever.

       15
  The pure contralto sings in the organ loft,
  The carpenter dresses his plank, the tongue of his foreplane
      whistles its wild ascending lisp,
  The married and unmarried children ride home to their Thanksgiving dinner,
  The pilot seizes the king-pin, he heaves down with a strong arm,
  The mate stands braced in the whale-boat, lance and harpoon are ready,
  The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches,
  The deacons are ordain'd with cross'd hands at the altar,
  The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel,
  The farmer stops by the bars as he walks on a First-day loafe and
      looks at the oats and rye,
  The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum a confirm'd case,
  (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother's
      bed-room;)
  The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case,
  He turns his quid of tobacco while his eyes blurr with the manuscript;
  The malform'd limbs are tied to the surgeon's table,
  What is removed drops horribly in a pail;
  The quadroon girl is sold at the auction-stand, the drunkard nods by
      the bar-room stove,
  The machinist rolls up his sleeves, the policeman travels his beat,
      the gate-keeper marks who pass,
  The young fellow drives the express-wagon, (I love him, though I do
      not know him;)
  The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in the race,
  The western turkey-shooting draws old and young, some lean on their
      rifles, some sit on logs,
  Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his position, levels his piece;
  The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee,
  As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer views them
      from his saddle,
  The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for their
      partners, the dancers bow to each other,
  The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof'd garret and harks to the
      musical rain,
  The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron,
  The squaw wrapt in her yellow-hemm'd cloth is offering moccasins and
      bead-bags for sale,
  The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with half-shut
      eyes bent sideways,
  As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat the plank is thrown for
      the shore-going passengers,
  The young sister holds out the skein while the elder sister winds it
      off in a ball, and stops now and then for the knots,
  The one-year wife is recovering and happy having a week ago borne
      her first child,
  The clean-hair'd Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine or in the
      factory or mill,
  The paving-man leans on his two-handed rammer, the reporter's lead
      flies swiftly over the note-book, the sign-painter is lettering
      with blue and gold,
  The canal boy trots on the tow-path, the book-keeper counts at his
      desk, the shoemaker waxes his thread,
  The conductor beats time for the band and all the performers follow him,
  The child is baptized, the convert is making his first professions,
  The regatta is spread on the bay, the race is begun, (how the white
      sails sparkle!)
  The drover watching his drove sings out to them that would stray,
  The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the purchaser higgling
      about the odd cent;)
  The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand of the clock
      moves slowly,
  The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-open'd lips,
  The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and
      pimpled neck,
  The crowd laugh at herguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to
      each other,
  (Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths nor jeer you;)
  The President holding a cabinet council is surrounded by the great
      Secretaries,
  On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly with twined arms,
  The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold,
  The Missourian crosses the plains toting his wares and his cattle,
  As the fare-collector goes through the train he gives notice by the
      jingling of loose change,
  The floor-men are laying the floor, the tinners are tinning the
      roof, the masons are calling for mortar,
  In single file each shouldering his hod pass onward the laborers;
  Seasons pursuing each other the indescribable crowd is gather'd, it
      is the fourth of Seventh-month, (what salutes of cannon and small arms!)
  Seasons pursuing each other the plougher ploughs, the mower mows,
      and the winter-grain falls in the ground;
  Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by the hole in
      the frozen surface,
  The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep
      with his axe,
  Flatboatmen make fast towards dusk near the cotton-wood or pecan-trees,
  Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river or through
      those drain'd by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansas,
  Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahooche or Altamahaw,
  Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great-grandsons
      around them,
  In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and trappers after
      their day's sport,
  The city sleeps and the country sleeps,
  The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their time,
  The old husband sleeps by his wife and the young husband sleeps by his wife;
  And these tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them,
  And such as it is to be of these more or less I am,
  And of these one and all I weave the song of myself.

       16
  I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,
  Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,
  Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,
  Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse and stuff'd with the stuff
      that is fine,
  One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the
      largest the same,
  A Southerner soon as a Northerner, a planter nonchalant and
      hospitable down by the Oconee I live,
  A Yankee bound my own way ready for trade, my joints the limberest
      joints on earth and the sternest joints on earth,
  A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deer-skin
      leggings, a Louisianian or Georgian,
  A boatman over lakes or bays or along coasts, a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye;
  At home on Kanadian snow-shoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen
      off Newfoundland,
  At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking,
  At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the
      Texan ranch,
  Comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners, (loving
      their big proportions,)
  Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen, comrade of all who shake hands
      and welcome to drink and meat,
  A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,
  A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,
  Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,
  A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,
  Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.

  I resist any thing better than my own diversity,
  Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,
  And am not stuck up, and am in my place.

  (The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,
  The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,
  The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.)

       17
  These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they
      are not original with me,
  If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or next to nothing,
  If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,
  If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.

  This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is,
  This the common air that bathes the globe.

       18
  With music strong I come, with my cornets and my drums,
  I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for
      conquer'd and slain persons.

  Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?
  I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit
      in which they are won.

  I beat and pound for the dead,
  I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.

  Vivas to those who have fail'd!
  And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!
  And to those themselves who sank in the sea!
  And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!
  And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!

       19
  This is the meal equally set, this the meat for natural hunger,
  It is for the wicked just same as the righteous, I make appointments
      with all,
  I will not have a single person slighted or left away,
  The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,
  The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;
  There shall be no difference between them and the rest.

  This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,
  This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,
  This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,
  This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.

  Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?
  Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the
      side of a rock has.

  Do you take it I would astonish?
  Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering
      through the woods?
  Do I astonish more than they?

  This hour I tell things in confidence,
  I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.

       20
  Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;
  How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?

  What is a man anyhow? what am I? what are you?

  All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own,
  Else it were time lost listening to me.

  I do not snivel that snivel the world over,
  That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth.

  Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids, conformity
      goes to the fourth-remov'd,
  I wear my hat as I please indoors or out.

  Why should I pray? why should I venerate and be ceremonious?

  Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsel'd with
      doctors and calculated close,
  I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones.

  In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barley-corn less,
  And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.

  I know I am solid and sound,
  To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,
  All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.

  I know I am deathless,
  I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter's compass,
  I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with a burnt
      stick at night.

  I know I am august,
  I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,
  I see that the elementary laws never apologize,
  (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by,
      after all.)

  I exist as I am, that is enough,
  If no other in the world be aware I sit content,
  And if each and all be aware I sit content.

  One world is aware and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,
  And whether I come to my own to-day or in ten thousand or ten
      million years,
  I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.

  My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite,
  I laugh at what you call dissolution,
  And I know the amplitude of time.

       21
  I am the poet of the Body and I am the poet of the Soul,
  The pleasures of heaven are with me and the pains of hell are with me,
  The first I graft and increase upon myself, the latter I translate
      into new tongue.

  I am the poet of the woman the same as the man,
  And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man,
  And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men.

  I chant the chant of dilation or pride,
  We have had ducking and deprecating about enough,
  I show that size is only development.

  Have you outstript the rest? are you the President?
  It is a trifle, they will more than arrive there every one, and
      still pass on.

  I am he that walks with the tender and growing night,
  I call to the earth and sea half-held by the night.

  Press close bare-bosom'd night--press close magnetic nourishing night!
  Night of south winds--night of the large few stars!
  Still nodding night--mad naked summer night.

  Smile O voluptuous cool-breath'd earth!
  Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees!
  Earth of departed sunset--earth of the mountains misty-topt!
  Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon just tinged with blue!
  Earth of shine and dark mottling the tide of the river!
  Earth of the limpid gray of clouds brighter and clearer for my sake!
  Far-swooping elbow'd earth--rich apple-blossom'd earth!
  Smile, for your lover comes.

  Prodigal, you have given me love--therefore I to you give love!
  O unspeakable passionate love.

  Thruster holding me tight and that I hold tight!
  We hurt each other as the bridegroom and the bride hurt each other.

       22
  You sea! I resign myself to you also--I guess what you mean,
  I behold from the beach your crooked fingers,
  I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me,
  We must have a turn together, I undress, hurry me out of sight of the land,
  Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse,
  Dash me with amorous wet, I can repay you.

  Sea of stretch'd ground-swells,
  Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths,
  Sea of the brine of life and of unshovell'd yet always-ready graves,
  Howler and scooper of storms, capricious and dainty sea,
  I am integral with you, I too am of one phase and of all phases.

  Partaker of influx and efflux I, extoller of hate and conciliation,
  Extoller of amies and those that sleep in each others' arms.

  I am he attesting sympathy,
  (Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house that
      supports them?)

  I am not the poet of goodness only, I do not decline to be the poet
      of wickedness also.

  What blurt is this about virtue and about vice?
  Evil propels me and reform of evil propels me, I stand indifferent,
  My gait is no fault-finder's or rejecter's gait,
  I moisten the roots of all that has grown.

  Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy?
  Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work'd over and rectified?

  I find one side a balance and the antipedal side a balance,
  Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine,
  Thoughts and deeds of the present our rouse and early start.

  This minute that comes to me over the past decillions,
  There is no better than it and now.

  What behaved well in the past or behaves well to-day is not such wonder,
  The wonder is always and always how there can be a mean man or an infidel.

       23
  Endless unfolding of words of ages!
  And mine a word of the modern, the word En-Masse.

  A word of the faith that never balks,
  Here or henceforward it is all the same to me, I accept Time absolutely.

  It alone is without flaw, it alone rounds and completes all,
  That mystic baffling wonder alone completes all.

  I accept Reality and dare not question it,
  Materialism first and last imbuing.

  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration!
  Fetch stonecrop mixt with cedar and branches of lilac,
  This is the lexicographer, this the chemist, this made a grammar of
      the old cartouches,
  These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas.
  This is the geologist, this works with the scalper, and this is a
      mathematician.

  Gentlemen, to you the first honors always!
  Your facts are useful, and yet they are not my dwelling,
  I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.

  Less the reminders of properties told my words,
  And more the reminders they of life untold, and of freedom and extrication,
  And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and
      women fully equipt,
  And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives and them that
      plot and conspire.

       24
  Walt Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son,
  Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating, drinking and breeding,
  No sentimentalist, no stander above men and women or apart from them,
  No more modest than immodest.

  Unscrew the locks from the doors!
  Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!

  Whoever degrades another degrades me,
  And whatever is done or said returns at last to me.

  Through me the afflatus surging and surging, through me the current
      and index.

  I speak the pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy,
  By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their
      counterpart of on the same terms.

  Through me many long dumb voices,
  Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves,
  Voices of the diseas'd and despairing and of thieves and dwarfs,
  Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,
  And of the threads that connect the stars, and of wombs and of the
      father-stuff,
  And of the rights of them the others are down upon,
  Of the deform'd, trivial, flat, foolish, despised,
  Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung.

  Through me forbidden voices,
  Voices ofes and lusts, voices veil'd and I remove the veil,
  Voices indecent by me clarified and transfigur'd.

  I do not press my fingers across my mouth,
  I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart,
  Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.

  I believe in the flesh and the appetites,
  Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part and tag of me
      is a miracle.

  Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am
      touch'd from,
  The scent of these arm-pits aroma finer than prayer,
  This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds.

  If I worship one thing more than another it shall be the spread of
      my own body, or any part of it,
  Translucent mould of me it shall be you!
  Shaded ledges and rests it shall be you!
  Firm masculine colter it shall be you!
  Whatever goes to the tilth of me it shall be you!
  You my rich blood! your milky stream pale strippings of my life!
  Breast that presses against other breasts it shall be you!
  My brain it shall be your occult convolutions!
  Root of wash'd sweet-flag! timorous pond-snipe! nest of guarded
      duplicate eggs! it shall be you!
  Mix'd tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be you!
  Trickling sap of maple, fibre of manly wheat, it shall be you!
  Sun so generous it shall be you!
  Vapors lighting and shading my face it shall be you!
  You sweaty brooks and dews it shall be you!
  Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me it shall be you!
  Broad muscular fields, branches of live oak, loving lounger in my
      winding paths, it shall be you!
  Hands I have taken, face I have kiss'd, mortal I have ever touch'd,
      it shall be you.

  I dote on myself, there is that lot of me and all so luscious,
  Each moment and whatever happens thrills me with joy,
  I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause of my faintest wish,
  Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause of the
      friendship I take again.

  That I walk up my stoop, I pause to consider if it really be,
  A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics
      of books.

  To behold the day-break!
  The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows,
  The air tastes good to my palate.

  Hefts of the moving world at innocent gambols silently rising
      freshly exuding,
  Scooting obliquely high and low.

  Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs,
  Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.

  The earth by the sky staid with, the daily close of their junction,
  The heav'd challenge from the east that moment over my head,
  The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master!

       25
  Dazzling and tremendous how quick the sun-rise would kill me,
  If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of me.

  We also ascend dazzling and tremendous as the sun,
  We found our own O my soul in the calm and cool of the daybreak.

  My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach,
  With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds and volumes of worlds.

  Speech is the twin of my vision, it is unequal to measure itself,
  It provokes me forever, it says sarcastically,
  Walt you contain enough, why don't you let it out then?

  Come now I will not be tantalized, you conceive too much of
      articulation,
  Do you not know O speech how the buds beneath you are folded?
  Waiting in gloom, protected by frost,
  The dirt receding before my prophetical screams,
  I underlying causes to balance them at last,
  My knowledge my live parts, it keeping tally with the meaning of all things,
  Happiness, (which whoever hears me let him or her set out in search
      of this day.)

  My final merit I refuse you, I refuse putting from me what I really am,
  Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me,
  I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking toward you.

  Writing and talk do not prove me,
  I carry the plenum of proof and every thing else in my face,
  With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skeptic.

       26
  Now I will do nothing but listen,
  To accrue what I hear into this song, to let sounds contribute toward it.

  I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat, gossip of flames,
      clack of sticks cooking my meals,
  I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human voice,
  I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused or following,
  Sounds of the city and sounds out of the city, sounds of the day and night,
  Talkative young ones to those that like them, the loud laugh of
      work-people at their meals,
  The angry base of disjointed friendship, the faint tones of the sick,
  The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips pronouncing
      a death-sentence,
  The heave'e'yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves, the
      refrain of the anchor-lifters,
  The ring of alarm-bells, the cry of fire, the whirr of swift-streaking
      engines and hose-carts with premonitory tinkles and color'd lights,
  The steam-whistle, the solid roll of the train of approaching cars,
  The slow march play'd at the head of the association marching two and two,
  (They go to guard some corpse, the flag-tops are draped with muslin.)

  I hear the violoncello, ('tis the young man's heart's complaint,)
  I hear the key'd cornet, it glides quickly in through my ears,
  It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and breast.

  I hear the chorus, it is a grand opera,
  Ah this indeed is music--this suits me.

  A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me,
  The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full.

  I hear the train'd soprano (what work with hers is this?)
  The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies,
  It wrenches such ardors from me I did not know I possess'd them,
  It sails me, I dab with bare feet, they are lick'd by the indolent waves,
  I am cut by bitter and angry hail, I lose my breath,
  Steep'd amid honey'd morphine, my windpipe throttled in fakes of death,
  At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,
  And that we call Being.

       27
  To be in any form, what is that?
  (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)
  If nothing lay more develop'd the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.

  Mine is no callous shell,
  I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,
  They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.

  I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,
  To touch my person to some one else's is about as much as I can stand.

       28
  Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,
  Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,
  Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,
  My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly
      different from myself,
  On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,
  Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,
  Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,
  Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,
  Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,
  Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,
  Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,
  They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,
  No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,
  Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,
  Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.

  The sentries desert every other part of me,
  They have left me helpless to a red marauder,
  They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.

  I am given up by traitors,
  I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the
      greatest traitor,
  I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.

  You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,
  Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me.

       29
  Blind loving wrestling touch, sheath'd hooded sharp-tooth'd touch!
  Did it make you ache so, leaving me?

  Parting track'd by arriving, perpetual payment of perpetual loan,
  Rich showering rain, and recompense richer afterward.

  Sprouts take and accumulate, stand by the curb prolific and vital,
  Landscapes projected masculine, full-sized and golden.

       30
  All truths wait in all things,
  They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it,
  They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon,
  The insignificant is as big to me as any,
  (What is less or more than a touch?)

  Logic and sermons never convince,
  The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.

  (Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so,
  Only what nobody denies is so.)

  A minute and a drop of me settle my brain,
  I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps,
  And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman,
  And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other,
  And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it
      becomes omnific,
  And until one and all shall delight us, and we them.

       31
  I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars,
  And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg
      of the wren,
  And the tree-toad is a chef-d'oeuvre for the highest,
  And the runningberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,
  And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery,
  And the cow crunching with depress'd head surpasses any statue,
  And a mouse is miracle enough to staggertillions of infidels.

  I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss, fruits,
      grains, esculent roots,
  And am stucco'd with quadrupeds and birds all over,
  And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons,
  But call any thing back again when I desire it.

  In vain the speeding or shyness,
  In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach,
  In vain the mastodon retreats beneath its own powder'd bones,
  In vain objects stand leagues off and assume manifold shapes,
  In vain the ocean settling in hollows and the great monsters lying low,
  In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky,
  In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs,
  In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods,
  In vain the razor-bill'd auk sails far north to Labrador,
  I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff.

       32
  I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and
      self-contain'd,
  I stand and look at them long and long.

  They do not sweat and whine about their condition,
  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
  They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of
      owning things,
  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of
      years ago,
  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.

  So they show their relations to me and I accept them,
  They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their
      possession.

  I wonder where they get those tokens,
  Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?

  Myself moving forward then and now and forever,
  Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,
  Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among them,
  Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers,
  Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him on brotherly terms.

  A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses,
  Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears,
  Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,
  Eyes full of sparkling wickedness, ears finely cut, flexibly moving.

  His nostrils dilate as my heels embrace him,
  His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.

  I but use you a minute, then I resign you, stallion,
  Why do I need your paces when I myself out-gallop them?
  Even as I stand or sit passing faster than you.

       33
  Space and Time! now I see it is true, what I guess'd at,
  What I guess'd when I loaf'd on the grass,
  What I guess'd while I lay alone in my bed,
  And again as I walk'd the beach under the paling stars of the morning.

  My ties and ballasts leave me, my elbows rest in sea-gaps,
  I skirt sierras, my palms cover continents,
  I am afoot with my vision.

  By the city's quadrangular houses--in log huts, camping with lumber-men,
  Along the ruts of the turnpike, along the dry gulch and rivulet bed,
  Weeding my onion-patch or hosing rows of carrots and parsnips,
      crossing savannas, trailing in forests,
  Prospecting, gold-digging, girdling the trees of a new purchase,
  Scorch'd ankle-deep by the hot sand, hauling my boat down the
      shallow river,
  Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead, where the
      buck turns furiously at the hunter,
  Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock, where the
      otter is feeding on fish,
  Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou,
  Where the bear is searching for roots or honey, where the
      beaver pats the mud with his paddle-shaped tall;
  Over the growing sugar, over the yellow-flower'd cotton plant, over
      the rice in its low moist field,
  Over the sharp-peak'd farm house, with its scallop'd scum and
      slender shoots from the gutters,
  Over the western persimmon, over the long-leav'd corn, over the
      delicate blue-flower flax,
  Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and buzzer there with
      the rest,
  Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze;
  Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, holding on by low
      scragged limbs,
  Walking the path worn in the grass and beat through the leaves of the brush,
  Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheat-lot,
  Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve, where the great
      goldbug drops through the dark,
  Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to
      the meadow,
  Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous
      shuddering of their hides,
  Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen, where andirons straddle
      the hearth-slab, where cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters;
  Where trip-hammers crash, where the press is whirling its cylinders,
  Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes under its ribs,
  Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, (floating in it
      myself and looking composedly down,)
  Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose, where the heat
      hatches pale-green eggs in the dented sand,
  Where the she-whale swims with her calf and never forsakes it,
  Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant of smoke,
  Where the fin of the shark cuts like a chip out of the water,
  Where the half-burn'd brig is riding on unknown currents,
  Where shells grow to her slimy deck, where the dead are corrupting below;
  Where the dense-starr'd flag is borne at the head of the regiments,
  Approaching Manhattan up by the long-stretching island,
  Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance,
  Upon a door-step, upon the horse-block of hard wood outside,
  Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs or a good game of
      base-ball,
  At he-festivals, withguard gibes, ironical license,
      bull-dances, drinking, laughter,
  At the cider-mill tasting the sweets of the brown mash, sucking the
      juice through a straw,
  At apple-peelings wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find,
  At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings, house-raisings;
  Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles, cackles,
      screams, weeps,
  Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard, where the dry-stalks are
      scatter'd, where the brood-cow waits in the hovel,
  Where the bull advances to do his masculine work, where the stud to
      the mare, where the cock is treading the hen,
  Where the heifers browse, where geese nip their food with short jerks,
  Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie,
  Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles
      far and near,
  Where the humming-bird shimmers, where the neck of the long-lived
      swan is curving and winding,
  Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where she laughs her
      near-human laugh,
  Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden half hid by the
      high weeds,
  Where band-neck'd partridges roost in a ring on the ground with
      their heads out,
  Where burial coaches enter the arch'd gates of a cemetery,
  Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees,
  Where the yellow-crown'd heron comes to the edge of the marsh at
      night and feeds upon small crabs,
  Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon,
  Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over
      the well,
  Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves,
  Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under conical firs,
  Through the gymnasium, through the curtain'd saloon, through the
      office or public hall;
  Pleas'd with the native and pleas'd with the foreign, pleas'd with
      the new and old,
  Pleas'd with the homely woman as well as the handsome,
  Pleas'd with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously,
  Pleas'd with the tune of the choir of the whitewash'd church,
  Pleas'd with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher,
      impress'd seriously at the camp-meeting;
  Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the whole forenoon,
      flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate glass,
  Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn'd up to the clouds,
      or down a lane or along the beach,
  My right and left arms round the sides of two friends, and I in the middle;
  Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek'd bush-boy, (behind me
      he rides at the drape of the day,)
  Far from the settlements studying the print of animals' feet, or the
      moccasin print,
  By the cot in the hospital reaching lemonade to a feverish patient,
  Nigh the coffin'd corpse when all is still, examining with a candle;
  Voyaging to every port to dicker and adventure,
  Hurrying with the modern crowd as eager and fickle as any,
  Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him,
  Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while,
  Walking the old hills of Judaea with the beautiful gentle God by my side,
  Speeding through space, speeding through heaven and the stars,
  Speeding amid the seven satellites and the broad ring, and the
      diameter of eighty thousand miles,
  Speeding with tail'd meteors, throwing fire-balls like the rest,
  Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly,
  Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning,
  Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing,
  I tread day and night such roads.

  I visit the orchards of spheres and look at the product,
  And look at quintillions ripen'd and look at quintillions green.

  I fly those flights of a fluid and swallowing soul,
  My course runs below the soundings of plummets.

  I help myself to material and immaterial,
  No guard can shut me off, no law prevent me.

  I anchor my ship for a little while only,
  My messengers continually cruise away or bring their returns to me.

  I go hunting polar furs and the seal, leaping chasms with a
      pike-pointed staff, clinging to topples of brittle and blue.

  I ascend to the foretruck,
  I take my place late at night in the crow's-nest,
  We sail the arctic sea, it is plenty light enough,
  Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty,
  The enormous masses of ice pass me and I pass them, the scenery is
      plain in all directions,
  The white-topt mountains show in the distance, I fling out my
      fancies toward them,
  We are approaching some great battle-field in which we are soon to
      be engaged,
  We pass the colossal outposts of the encampment, we pass with still
      feet and caution,
  Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruin'd city,
  The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities
      of the globe.

  I am a free companion, I bivouac by invading watchfires,
  I turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself,
  I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.

  My voice is the wife's voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs,
  They fetch my man's body up dripping and drown'd.

  I understand the large hearts of heroes,
  The courage of present times and all times,
  How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the
      steamship, and Death chasing it up and down the storm,
  How he knuckled tight and gave not back an inch, and was faithful of
      days and faithful of nights,
  And chalk'd in large letters on a board, Be of good cheer, we will
      not desert you;
  How he follow'd with them and tack'd with them three days and
      would not give it up,
  How he saved the drifting company at last,
  How the lank loose-gown'd women look'd when boated from the
      side of their prepared graves,
  How the silent old-faced infants and the lifted sick, and the
      sharp-lipp'd unshaved men;
  All this I swallow, it tastes good, I like it well, it becomes mine,
  I am the man, I suffer'd, I was there.

  The disdain and calmness of martyrs,
  The mother of old, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her
      children gazing on,
  The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence,
      blowing, cover'd with sweat,
  The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, the murderous
      buckshot and the bullets,
  All these I feel or am.

  I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the dogs,
  Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack the marksmen,
  I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn'd with the
      ooze of my skin,
  I fall on the weeds and stones,
  The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close,
  Taunt my dizzy ears and beat me violently over the head with whip-stocks.

  Agonies are one of my changes of garments,
  I do not ask the wounded person how he feels, I myself become the
      wounded person,
  My hurts turn livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe.

  I am the mash'd fireman with breast-bone broken,
  Tumbling walls buried me in their debris,
  Heat and smoke I inspired, I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades,
  I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels,
  They have clear'd the beams away, they tenderly lift me forth.

  I lie in the night air in my red shirt, the pervading hush is for my sake,
  Painless after all I lie exhausted but not so unhappy,
  White and beautiful are the faces around me, the heads are bared
      of their fire-caps,
  The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches.

  Distant and dead resuscitate,
  They show as the dial or move as the hands of me, I am the clock myself.

  I am an old artillerist, I tell of my fort's bombardment,
  I am there again.

  Again the long roll of the drummers,
  Again the attacking cannon, mortars,
  Again to my listening ears the cannon responsive.

  I take part, I see and hear the whole,
  The cries, curses, roar, the plaudits for well-aim'd shots,
  The ambulanza slowly passing trailing its red drip,
  Workmen searching after damages, making indispensable repairs,
  The fall of grenades through the rent roof, the fan-shaped explosion,
  The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in the air.

  Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general, he furiously waves
      with his hand,
  He gasps through the clot Mind not me--mind--the entrenchments.

       34
  Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth,
  (I tell not the fall of Alamo,
  Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo,
  The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo,)
  'Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve
      young men.

  Retreating they had form'd in a hollow square with their baggage for
      breastworks,
  Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemies, nine times their
      number, was the price they took in advance,
  Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gPatterns



   I walk down the garden paths,
   And all the daffodils
   Are blowing, and the bright blue squills.
   I walk down the patterned garden-paths
   In my stiff, brocaded gown.
   With my powdered hair and jewelled fan,
   I too am a rare
   Pattern.  As I wander down
   The garden paths.

   My dress is richly figured,
   And the train
   Makes a pink and silver stain
   On the gravel, and the thrift
   Of the borders.
   Just a plate of current fashion,
   Tripping by in high-heeled, ribboned shoes.
   Not a softness anywhere about me,
   Only whalebone and brocade.
   And I sink on a seat in the shade
   Of a lime tree.  For my passion
   Wars against the stiff brocade.
   The daffodils and squills
   Flutter in the breeze
   As they please.
   And I weep;
   For the lime-tree is in blossom
   And one small flower has dropped upon my bosom.

   And the plashing of waterdrops
   In the marble fountain
   Comes down the garden-paths.
   The dripping never stops.
   Underneath my stiffened gown
   Is the softness of a woman bathing in a marble basin,
   A basin in the midst of hedges grown
   So thick, she cannot see her lover hiding,
   But she guesses he is near,
   And the sliding of the water
   Seems the stroking of a dear
   Hand upon her.
   What is Summer in a fine brocaded gown!
   I should like to see it lying in a heap upon the ground.
   All the pink and silver crumpled up on the ground.

   I would be the pink and silver as I ran along the paths,
   And he would stumble after,
   Bewildered by my laughter.
   I should see the sun flashing from his sword-hilt and the buckles
     on his shoes.
   I would choose
   To lead him in a maze along the patterned paths,
   A bright and laughing maze for my heavy-booted lover,
   Till he caught me in the shade,
   And the buttons of his waistcoat bruised my body as he clasped me,
   Aching, melting, unafraid.
   With the shadows of the leaves and the sundrops,
   And the plopping of the waterdrops,
   All about us in the open afternoon--
   I am very like to swoon
   With the weight of this brocade,
   For the sun sifts through the shade.

   Underneath the fallen blossom
   In my bosom,
   Is a letter I have hid.
   It was brought to me this morning by a rider from the Duke.
   "Madam, we regret to inform you that Lord Hartwell
   Died in action Thursday se'nnight."
   As I read it in the white, morning sunlight,
   The letters squirmed like snakes.
   "Any answer, Madam," said my footman.
   "No," I told him.
   "See that the messenger takes some refreshment.
   No, no answer."
   And I walked into the garden,
   Up and down the patterned paths,
   In my stiff, correct brocade.
   The blue and yellow flowers stood up proudly in the sun,
   Each one.
   I stood upright too,
   Held rigid to the pattern
   By the stiffness of my gown.
   Up and down I walked,
   Up and down.

   In a month he would have been my husband.
   In a month, here, underneath this lime,
   We would have broke the pattern;
   He for me, and I for him,
   He as Colonel, I as Lady,
   On this shady seat.
   He had a whim
   That sunlight carried blessing.
   And I answered, "It shall be as you have said."
   Now he is dead.

   In Summer and in Winter I shall walk
   Up and down
   The patterned garden-paths
   In my stiff, brocaded gown.
   The squills and daffodils
   Will give place to pillared roses, and to asters, and to snow.
   I shall go
   Up and down,
   In my gown.
   Gorgeously arrayed,
   Boned and stayed.
   And the softness of my body will be guarded from embrace
   By each button, hook, and lace.
   For the man who should loose me is dead,
   Fighting with the Duke in Flanders,
   In a pattern called a war.
   Christ!  What are patterns for?




Pickthorn Manor



       I

   How fresh the Dartle's little waves that day!
    A steely silver, underlined with blue,
   And flashing where the round clouds, blown away,
    Let drop the yellow sunshine to gleam through
   And tip the edges of the waves with shifts
    And spots of whitest fire, hard like gems
       Cut from the midnight moon they were, and sharp
    As wind through leafless stems.
   The Lady Eunice walked between the drifts
   Of blooming cherry-trees, and watched the rifts
       Of clouds drawn through the river's azure warp.


       II

   Her little feet tapped softly down the path.
    Her soul was listless; even the morning breeze
   Fluttering the trees and strewing a light swath
    Of fallen petals on the grass, could please
   Her not at all.  She brushed a hair aside
    With a swift move, and a half-angry frown.
       She stopped to pull a daffodil or two,
    And held them to her gown
   To test the colours; put them at her side,
   Then at her breast, then loosened them and tried
       Some new arrangement, but it would not do.


       III

   A lady in a Manor-house, alone,
    Whose husband is in Flanders with the Duke
   Of Marlborough and Prince Eugene, she's grown
    Too apathetic even to rebuke
   Her idleness.  What is she on this Earth?
    No woman surely, since she neither can
       Be wed nor single, must not let her mind
    Build thoughts upon a man
   Except for hers.  Indeed that were no dearth
   Were her Lord here, for well she knew his worth,
       And when she thought of him her eyes were kind.


       IV

   Too lately wed to have forgot the wooing.
    Too unaccustomed as a bride to feel
   Other than strange delight at her wife's doing.
    Even at the thought a gentle blush would steal
   Over her face, and then her lips would frame
    Some little word of loving, and her eyes
       Would brim and spill their tears, when all they saw
    Was the bright sun, slantwise
   Through burgeoning trees, and all the morning's flame
   Burning and quivering round her.  With quick shame
       She shut her heart and bent before the law.


       V

   He was a soldier, she was proud of that.
    This was his house and she would keep it well.
   His honour was in fighting, hers in what
    He'd left her here in charge of.  Then a spell
   Of conscience sent her through the orchard spying
    Upon the gardeners.  Were their tools about?
       Were any branches broken?  Had the weeds
    Been duly taken out
   Under the 'spaliered pears, and were these lying
   Nailed snug against the sunny bricks and drying
       Their leaves and satisfying all their needs?


       VI

   She picked a stone up with a little pout,
    Stones looked so ill in well-kept flower-borders.
   Where should she put it?  All the paths about
    Were strewn with fair, red gravel by her orders.
   No stone could mar their sifted smoothness.  So
    She hurried to the river.  At the edge
       She stood a moment charmed by the swift blue
    Beyond the river sedge.
   She watched it curdling, crinkling, and the snow
   Purfled upon its wave-tops.  Then, "Hullo,
       My Beauty, gently, or you'll wriggle through."


       VII

   The Lady Eunice caught a willow spray
    To save herself from tumbling in the shallows
   Which rippled to her feet.  Then straight away
    She peered down stream among the budding sallows.
   A youth in leather breeches and a shirt
    Of finest broidered lawn lay out upon
       An overhanging bole and deftly swayed
    A well-hooked fish which shone
   In the pale lemon sunshine like a spurt
   Of silver, bowed and damascened, and girt
       With crimson spots and moons which waned and played.


       VIII

   The fish hung circled for a moment, ringed
    And bright; then flung itself out, a thin blade
   Of spotted lightning, and its tail was winged
    With chipped and sparkled sunshine.  And the shade
   Broke up and splintered into shafts of light
    Wheeling about the fish, who churned the air
       And made the fish-line hum, and bent the rod
    Almost to snapping.  Care
   The young man took against the twigs, with slight,
   Deft movements he kept fish and line in tight
       Obedience to his will with every prod.


       IX

   He lay there, and the fish hung just beyond.
    He seemed uncertain what more he should do.
   He drew back, pulled the rod to correspond,
    Tossed it and caught it; every time he threw,
   He caught it nearer to the point.  At last
    The fish was near enough to touch.  He paused.
       Eunice knew well the craft--"What's got the thing!"
    She cried.  "What can have caused--
   Where is his net?  The moment will be past.
   The fish will wriggle free."  She stopped aghast.
       He turned and bowed.  One arm was in a sling.


       X

   The broad, ribbon she had thought his basket
    Must hang from, held instead a useless arm.
   "I do not wonder, Madam, that you ask it."
    He smiled, for she had spoke aloud.  "The charm
   Of trout fishing is in my eyes enhanced
    When you must play your fish on land as well."
       "How will you take him?" Eunice asked.  "In truth
    I really cannot tell.
   'Twas stupid of me, but it simply chanced
   I never thought of that until he glanced
       Into the branches.  'Tis a bit uncouth."


       XI

   He watched the fish against the blowing sky,
    Writhing and glittering, pulling at the line.
   "The hook is fast, I might just let him die,"
    He mused.  "But that would jar against your fine
   Sense of true sportsmanship, I know it would,"
    Cried Eunice.  "Let me do it."  Swift and light
       She ran towards him.  "It is so long now
    Since I have felt a bite,
   I lost all heart for everything."  She stood,
   Supple and strong, beside him, and her blood
       Tingled her lissom body to a glow.


       XII

   She quickly seized the fish and with a stone
    Ended its flurry, then removed the hook,
   Untied the fly with well-poised fingers.  Done,
    She asked him where he kept his fishing-book.
   He pointed to a coat flung on the ground.
    She searched the pockets, found a shagreen case,
       Replaced the fly, noticed a golden stamp
    Filling the middle space.
   Two letters half rubbed out were there, and round
   About them gay rococo flowers wound
       And tossed a spray of roses to the clamp.


       XIII

   The Lady Eunice puzzled over these.
    "G. D." the young man gravely said.  "My name
   Is Gervase Deane.  Your servant, if you please."
    "Oh, Sir, indeed I know you, for your fame
   For exploits in the field has reached my ears.
    I did not know you wounded and returned."
       "But just come back, Madam.  A silly prick
    To gain me such unearned
   Holiday making.  And you, it appears,
   Must be Sir Everard's lady.  And my fears
       At being caught a-trespassing were quick."


       XIV

   He looked so rueful that she laughed out loud.
    "You are forgiven, Mr. Deane.  Even more,
   I offer you the fishing, and am proud
    That you should find it pleasant from this shore.
   Nobody fishes now, my husband used
    To angle daily, and I too with him.
       He loved the spotted trout, and pike, and dace.
    He even had a whim
   That flies my fingers tied swiftly confused
   The greater fish.  And he must be excused,
       Love weaves odd fancies in a lonely place."


       XV

   She sighed because it seemed so long ago,
    Those days with Everard; unthinking took
   The path back to the orchard.  Strolling so
    She walked, and he beside her.  In a nook
   Where a stone seat withdrew beneath low boughs,
    Full-blossomed, hummed with bees, they sat them down.
       She questioned him about the war, the share
    Her husband had, and grown
   Eager by his clear answers, straight allows
   Her hidden hopes and fears to speak, and rouse
       Her numbed love, which had slumbered unaware.


       XVI

   Under the orchard trees daffodils danced
    And jostled, turning sideways to the wind.
   A dropping cherry petal softly glanced
    Over her hair, and slid away behind.
   At the far end through twisted cherry-trees
    The old house glowed, geranium-hued, with bricks
       Bloomed in the sun like roses, low and long,
    Gabled, and with quaint tricks
   Of chimneys carved and fretted.  Out of these
   Grey smoke was shaken, which the faint Spring breeze
       Tossed into nothing.  Then a thrush's song


       XVII

   Needled its way through sound of bees and river.
    The notes fell, round and starred, between young leaves,
   Trilled to a spiral lilt, stopped on a quiver.
    The Lady Eunice listens and believes.
   Gervase has many tales of her dear Lord,
    His bravery, his knowledge, his charmed life.
       She quite forgets who's speaking in the gladness
    Of being this man's wife.
   Gervase is wounded, grave indeed, the word
   Is kindly said, but to a softer chord
       She strings her voice to ask with wistful sadness,


       XVIII

   "And is Sir Everard still unscathed?  I fain
    Would know the truth."  "Quite well, dear Lady, quite."
   She smiled in her content.  "So many slain,
    You must forgive me for a little fright."
   And he forgave her, not alone for that,
    But because she was fingering his heart,
       Pressing and squeezing it, and thinking so
    Only to ease her smart
   Of painful, apprehensive longing.  At
   Their feet the river swirled and chucked.  They sat
       An hour there.  The thrush flew to and fro.


       XIX

   The Lady Eunice supped alone that day,
    As always since Sir Everard had gone,
   In the oak-panelled parlour, whose array
    Of faded portraits in carved mouldings shone.
   Warriors and ladies, armoured, ruffed, peruked.
    Van Dykes with long, slim fingers; Holbeins, stout
       And heavy-featured; and one Rubens dame,
    A peony just burst out,
   With flaunting, crimson flesh.  Eunice rebuked
   Her thoughts of gentler blood, when these had duked
       It with the best, and scorned to change their name.


       XX

   A sturdy family, and old besides,
    Much older than her own, the Earls of Crowe.
   Since Saxon days, these men had sought their brides
    Among the highest born, but always so,
   Taking them to themselves, their wealth, their lands,
    But never their titles.  Stern perhaps, but strong,
       The Framptons fed their blood from richest streams,
    Scorning the common throng.
   Gazing upon these men, she understands
   The toughness of the web wrought from such strands
       And pride of Everard colours all her dreams.


       XXI

   Eunice forgets to eat, watching their faces
    Flickering in the wind-blown candle's shine.
   Blue-coated lackeys tiptoe to their places,
    And set out plates of fruit and jugs of wine.
   The table glitters like Winter ice.
    The Dartle's rushing, and the gentle clash
       Of blossomed branches, drifts into her ears.
    And through the casement sash
   She sees each cherry stem a pointed slice
   Of splintered moonlight, topped with all the spice
       And shimmer of the blossoms it uprears.


       XXII

   "In such a night--" she laid the book aside,
    She could outnight the poet by thinking back.
   In such a night she came here as a bride.
    The date was graven in the almanack
   Of her clasped memory.  In this very room
    Had Everard uncloaked her.  On this seat
       Had drawn her to him, bade her note the trees,
    How white they were and sweet
   And later, coming to her, her dear groom,
   Her Lord, had lain beside her in the gloom
       Of moon and shade, and whispered her to ease.


       XXIII

   Her little taper made the room seem vast,
    Caverned and empty.  And her beating heart
   Rapped through the silence all about her cast
    Like some loud, dreadful death-watch taking part
   In this sad vigil.  Slowly she undrest,
    Put out the light and crept into her bed.
       The linen sheets were fragrant, but so cold.
    And brimming tears she shed,
   Sobbing and quivering in her barren nest,
   Her weeping lips into the pillow prest,
       Her eyes sealed fast within its smothering fold.


       XXIV

   The morning brought her a more stoic mind,
    And sunshine struck across the polished floor.
   She wondered whether this day she should find
    Gervase a-fishing, and so listen more,
   Much more again, to all he had to tell.
    And he was there, but waiting to begin
       Until she came.  They fished awhile, then went
    To the old seat within
   The cherry's shade.  He pleased her very well
   By his discourse.  But ever he must dwell
       Upon Sir Everard.  Each incident


       XXV

   Must be related and each term explained.
    How troops were set in battle, how a siege
   Was ordered and conducted.  She complained
    Because he bungled at the fall of Liege.
   The curious names of parts of forts she knew,
    And aired with conscious pride her ravelins,
       And counterscarps, and lunes.  The day drew on,
    And his dead fish's fins
   In the hot sunshine turned a mauve-green hue.
   At last Gervase, guessing the hour, withdrew.
       But she sat long in still oblivion.


       XXVI

   Then he would bring her books, and read to her
    The poems of Dr. Donne, and the blue river
   Would murmur through the reading, and a stir
    Of birds and bees make the white petals shiver,
   And one or two would flutter prone and lie
    Spotting the smooth-clipped grass.  The days went by
       Threaded with talk and verses.  Green leaves pushed
    Through blossoms stubbornly.
   Gervase, unconscious of dishonesty,
   Fell into strong and watchful loving, free
       He thought, since always would his lips be hushed.


       XXVII

   But lips do not stay silent at command,
    And Gervase strove in vain to order his.
   Luckily Eunice did not understand
    That he but read himself aloud, for this
   Their friendship would have snapped.  She treated him
    And spoilt him like a brother.  It was now
       "Gervase" and "Eunice" with them, and he dined
    Whenever she'd allow,
   In the oak parlour, underneath the dim
   Old pictured Framptons, opposite her slim
       Figure, so bright against the chair behind.


       XXVIII

   Eunice was happier than she had been
    For many days, and yet the hours were long.
   All Gervase told to her but made her lean
    More heavily upon the past.  Among
   Her hopes she lived, even when she was giving
    Her morning orders, even when she twined
       Nosegays to deck her parlours.  With the thought
    Of Everard, her mind
   Solaced its solitude, and in her striving
   To do as he would wish was all her living.
       She welcomed Gervase for the news he brought.


       XXIX

   Black-hearts and white-hearts, bubbled with the sun,
    Hid in their leaves and knocked against each other.
   Eunice was standing, panting with her run
    Up to the tool-house just to get another
   Basket.  All those which she had brought were filled,
    And still Gervase pelted her from above.
       The buckles of his shoes flashed higher and higher
    Until his shoulders strove
   Quite through the top.  "Eunice, your spirit's filled
   This tree.  White-hearts!"  He shook, and cherries spilled
       And spat out from the leaves like falling fire.


       XXX

   The wide, sun-winged June morning spread itself
    Over the quiet garden.  And they packed
   Full twenty baskets with the fruit.  "My shelf
    Of cordials will be stored with what it lacked.
   In future, none of us will drink strong ale,
    But cherry-brandy."  "Vastly good, I vow,"
       And Gervase gave the tree another shake.
    The cherries seemed to flow
   Out of the sky in cloudfuls, like blown hail.
   Swift Lady Eunice ran, her farthingale,
       Unnoticed, tangling in a fallen rake.


       XXXI

   She gave a little cry and fell quite prone
    In the long grass, and lay there very still.
   Gervase leapt from the tree at her soft moan,
    And kneeling over her, with clumsy skill
   Unloosed her bodice, fanned her with his hat,
    And his unguarded lips pronounced his heart.
       "Eunice, my Dearest Girl, where are you hurt?"
    His trembling fingers dart
   Over her limbs seeking some wound.  She strove
   To answer, opened wide her eyes, above
       Her knelt Sir Everard, with face alert.


       XXXII

   Her eyelids fell again at that sweet sight,
    "My Love!" she murmured, "Dearest!  Oh, my Dear!"
   He took her in his arms and bore her right
    And tenderly to the old seat, and "Here
   I have you mine at last," she said, and swooned
    Under his kisses.  When she came once more
       To sight of him, she smiled in comfort knowing
    Herself laid as before
   Close covered on his breast.  And all her glowing
   Youth answered him, and ever nearer growing
       She twined him in her arms and soft festooned


       XXXIII

   Herself about him like a flowering vine,
    Drawing his lips to cling upon her own.
   A ray of sunlight pierced the leaves to shine
    Where her half-opened bodice let be shown
   Her white throat fluttering to his soft caress,
    Half-gasping with her gladness.  And her pledge
       She whispers, melting with delight.  A twig
    Snaps in the hornbeam hedge.
   A cackling laugh tears through the quietness.
   Eunice starts up in terrible distress.
       "My God!  What's that?"  Her staring eyes are big.


       XXXIV

   Revulsed emotion set her body shaking
    As though she had an ague.  Gervase swore,
   Jumped to his feet in such a dreadful taking
    His face was ghastly with the look it wore.
   Crouching and slipping through the trees, a man
    In worn, blue livery, a humpbacked thing,
       Made off.  But turned every few steps to gaze
    At Eunice, and to fling
   Vile looks and gestures back.  "The ruffian!
   By Christ's Death!  I will split him to a span
       Of hog's thongs."  She grasped at his sleeve, "Gervase!


       XXXV

   What are you doing here?  Put down that sword,
    That's only poor old Tony, crazed and lame.
   We never notice him.  With my dear Lord
    I ought not to have minded that he came.
   But, Gervase, it surprises me that you
    Should so lack grace to stay here."  With one hand
       She held her gaping bodice to conceal
    Her breast.  "I must demand
   Your instant absence.  Everard, but new
   Returned, will hardly care for guests.  Adieu."
       "Eunice, you're mad."  His brain began to reel.


       XXXVI

   He tried again to take her, tried to twist
    Her arms about him.  Truly, she had said
   Nothing should ever part them.  In a mist
    She pushed him from her, clasped her aching head
   In both her hands, and rocked and sobbed aloud.
    "Oh!  Where is Everard?  What does this mean?
       So lately come to leave me thus alone!"
    But Gervase had not seen
   Sir Everard.  Then, gently, to her bowed
   And sickening spirit, he told of her proud
       Surrender to him.  He could hear her moan.


       XXXVII

   Then shame swept over her and held her numb,
    Hiding her anguished face against the seat.
   At last she rose, a woman stricken--dumb--
    And trailed away with slowly-dragging feet.
   Gervase looked after her, but feared to pass
    The barrier set between them.  All his rare
       Joy broke to fragments--worse than that, unreal.
    And standing lonely there,
   His swollen heart burst out, and on the grass
   He flung himself and wept.  He knew, alas!
       The loss so great his life could never heal.


       XXXVIII

   For days thereafter Eunice lived retired,
    Waited upon by one old serving-maid.
   She would not leave her chamber, and desired
    Only to hide herself.  She was afraid
   Of what her eyes might trick her into seeing,
    Of what her longing urge her then to do.
       What was this dreadful illness solitude
    Had tortured her into?
   Her hours went by in a long constant fleeing
   The thought of that one morning.  And her being
       Bruised itself on a happening so rude.


       XXXIX

   It grew ripe Summer, when one morning came
    Her tirewoman with a letter, printed
   Upon the seal were the Deane crest and name.
    With utmost gentleness, the letter hinted
   His understanding and his deep regret.
    But would she not permit him once again
       To pay her his profound respects?  No word
    Of what had passed should pain
   Her resolution.  Only let them get
   Back the old comradeship.  Her eyes were wet
       With starting tears, now truly she deplored


       XL

   His misery.  Yes, she was wrong to keep
    Away from him.  He hardly was to blame.
   'Twas she--she shuddered and began to weep.
    'Twas her fault!  Hers!  Her everlasting shame
   Was that she suffered him, whom not at all
    She loved.  Poor Boy!  Yes, they must still be friends.
       She owed him that to keep the balance straight.
    It was such poor amends
   Which she could make for rousing hopes to gall
   Him with their unfulfilment.  Tragical
       It was, and she must leave him desolate.


       XLI

   Hard silence he had forced upon his lips
    For long and long, and would have done so still
   Had not she--here she pressed her finger tips
    Against her heavy eyes.  Then with forced will
   She wrote that he might come, sealed with the arms
    Of Crowe and Frampton twined.  Her heart felt lighter
       When this was done.  It seemed her constant care
    Might some day cease to fright her.
   Illness could be no crime, and dreadful harms
   Did come from too much sunshine.  Her alarms
       Would lessen when she saw him standing there,


       XLII

   Simple and kind, a brother just returned
    From journeying, and he would treat her so.
   She knew his honest heart, and if there burned
    A spark in it he would not let it show.
   But when he really came, and stood beside
    Her underneath the fruitless cherry boughs,
       He seemed a tired man, gaunt, leaden-eyed.
    He made her no more vows,
   Nor did he mention one thing he had tried
   To put into his letter.  War supplied
       Him topics.  And his mind seemed occupied.


       XLIII

   Daily they met.  And gravely walked and talked.
    He read her no more verses, and he stayed
   Only until their conversation, balked
    Of every natural channel, fled dismayed.
   Again the next day she would meet him, trying
    To give her tone some healthy sprightliness,
       But his uneager dignity soon chilled
    Her well-prepared address.
   Thus Summer waned, and in the mornings, crying
   Of wild geese startled Eunice, and their flying
       Whirred overhead for days and never stilled.


       XLIV

   One afternoon of grey clouds and white wind,
    Eunice awaited Gervase by the river.
   The Dartle splashed among the reeds and whined
    Over the willow-roots, and a long sliver
   Of caked and slobbered foam crept up the bank.
    All through the garden, drifts of skirling leaves
       Blew up, and settled down, and blew again.
    The cherry-trees were weaves
   Of empty, knotted branches, and a dank
   Mist hid the house, mouldy it smelt and rank
       With sodden wood, and still unfalling rain.


       XLV

   Eunice paced up and down.  No joy she took
    At meeting Gervase, but the custom grown
   Still held her.  He was late.  She sudden shook,
    And caught at her stopped heart.  Her eyes had shown
   Sir Everard emerging from the mist.
    His uniform was travel-stained and torn,
       His jackboots muddy, and his eager stride
    Jangled his spurs.  A thorn
   Entangled, trailed behind him.  To the tryst
   He hastened.  Eunice shuddered, ran--a twist
       Round a sharp turning and she fled to hide.


       XLVI

   But he had seen her as she swiftly ran,
    A flash of white against the river's grey.
   "Eunice," he called.  "My Darling.  Eunice.  Can
    You hear me?  It is Everard.  All day
   I have been riding like the very devil
    To reach you sooner.  Are you startled, Dear?"
       He broke into a run and followed her,
    And caught her, faint with fear,
   Cowering and trembling as though she some evil
   Spirit were seeing.  "What means this uncivil
       Greeting, Dear Heart?"  He saw her senses blur.


       XLVII

   Swaying and catching at the seat, she tried
    To speak, but only gurgled in her throat.
   At last, straining to hold herself, she cried
    To him for pity, and her strange words smote
   A coldness through him, for she begged Gervase
    To leave her, 'twas too much a second time.
       Gervase must go, always Gervase, her mind
    Repeated like a rhyme
   This name he did not know.  In sad amaze
   He watched her, and that hunted, fearful gaze,
       So unremembering and so unkind.


       XLVIII

   Softly he spoke to her, patiently dealt
    With what he feared her madness.  By and by
   He pierced her understanding.  Then he knelt
    Upon the seat, and took her hands:  "Now try
   To think a minute I am come, my Dear,
    Unharmed and back on furlough.  Are you glad
       To have your lover home again?  To me,
    Pickthorn has never had
   A greater pleasantness.  Could you not bear
   To come and sit awhile beside me here?
       A stone between us surely should not be."


       XLIX

   She smiled a little wan and ravelled smile,
    Then came to him and on his shoulder laid
   Her head, and they two rested there awhile,
    Each taking comfort.  Not a word was said.
   But when he put his hand upon her breast
    And felt her beating heart, and with his lips
       Sought solace for her and himself.  She started
    As one sharp lashed with whips,
   And pushed him from her, moaning, his dumb quest
   Denied and shuddered from.  And he, distrest,
       Loosened his wife, and long they sat there, parted.


       L

   Eunice was very quiet all that day,
    A little dazed, and yet she seemed content.
   At candle-time, he asked if she would play
    Upon her harpsichord, at once she went
   And tinkled airs from Lully's 'Carnival'
    And 'Bacchus', newly brought away from France.
       Then jaunted through a lively rigadoon
    To please him with a dance
   By Purcell, for he said that surely all
   Good Englishmen had pride in national
       Accomplishment.  But tiring of it soon


       LI

   He whispered her that if she had forgiven
    His startling her that afternoon, the clock
   Marked early bed-time.  Surely it was Heaven
    He entered when she opened to his knock.
   The hours rustled in the trailing wind
    Over the chimney.  Close they lay and knew
       Only that they were wedded.  At his touch
    Anxiety she threw
   Away like a shed garment, and inclined
   Herself to cherish him, her happy mind
       Quivering, unthinking, loving overmuch.


       LII

   Eunice lay long awake in the cool night
    After her husband slept.  She gazed with joy
   Into the shadows, painting them with bright
    Pictures of all her future life's employ.
   Twin gems they were, set to a single jewel,
    Each shining with the other.  Soft she turned
       And felt his breath upon her hair, and prayed
    Her happiness was earned.
   Past Earls of Crowe should give their blood for fuel
   To light this Frampton's hearth-fire.  By no cruel
       Affrightings would she ever be dismayed.


       LIII

   When Everard, next day, asked her in joke
    What name it was that she had called him by,
   She told him of Gervase, and as she spoke
    She hardly realized it was a lie.
   Her vision she related, but she hid
    The fondness into which she had been led.
       Sir Everard just laughed and pinched her ear,
    And quite out of her head
   The matter drifted.  Then Sir Everard chid
   Himself for laziness, and off he rid
       To see his men and count his farming-gear.


       LIV

   At supper he seemed overspread with gloom,
    But gave no reason why, he only asked
   More questions of Gervase, and round the room
    He walked with restless strides.  At last he tasked
   Her with a greater feeling for this man
    Than she had given.  Eunice quick denied
       The slightest interest other than a friend
    Might claim.  But he replied
   He thought she underrated.  Then a ban
   He put on talk and music.  He'd a plan
       To work at, draining swamps at Pickthorn End.


       LV

   Next morning Eunice found her Lord still changed,
    Hard and unkind, with bursts of anger.  Pride
   Kept him from speaking out.  His probings ranged
    All round his torment.  Lady Eunice tried
   To sooth him.  So a week went by, and then
    His anguish flooded over; with clenched hands
       Striving to stem his words, he told her plain
    Tony had seen them, "brands
   Burning in Hell," the man had said.  Again
   Eunice described her vision, and how when
       Awoke at last she had known dreadful pain.


       LVI

   He could not credit it, and misery fed
    Upon his spirit, day by day it grew.
   To Gervase he forbade the house, and led
    The Lady Eunice such a life she flew
   At his approaching footsteps.  Winter came
    Snowing and blustering through the Manor trees.
       All the roof-edges spiked with icicles
    In fluted companies.
   The Lady Eunice with her tambour-frame
   Kept herself sighing company.  The flame
       Of the birch fire glittered on the walls.


       LVII

   A letter was brought to her as she sat,
    Unsealed, unsigned.  It told her that his wound,
   The writer's, had so well recovered that
    To join his regiment he felt him bound.
   But would she not wish him one short "Godspeed",
    He asked no more.  Her greeting would suffice.
       He had resolved he never should return.
    Would she this sacrifice
   Make for a dying man?  How could she read
   The rest!  But forcing her eyes to the deed,
       She read.  Then dropped it in the fire to burn.


       LVIII

   Gervase had set the river for their meeting
    As farthest from the farms where Everard
   Spent all his days.  How should he know such cheating
    Was quite expected, at least no dullard
   Was Everard Frampton.  Hours by hours he hid
    Among the willows watching.  Dusk had come,
       And from the Manor he had long been gone.
    Eunice her burdensome
   Task set about.  Hooded and cloaked, she slid
   Over the slippery paths, and soon amid
       The sallows saw a boat tied to a stone.


       LIX

   Gervase arose, and kissed her hand, then pointed
    Into the boat.  She shook her head, but he
   Begged her to realize why, and with disjointed
    Words told her of what peril there might be
   From listeners along the river bank.
    A push would take them out of earshot.  Ten
       Minutes was all he asked, then she should land,
    He go away again,
   Forever this time.  Yet how could he thank
   Her for so much compassion.  Here she sank
       Upon a thwart, and bid him quick unstrand


       LX

   His boat.  He cast the rope, and shoved the keel
    Free of the gravel; jumped, and dropped beside
   Her; took the oars, and they began to steal
    Under the overhanging trees.  A wide
   Gash of red lantern-light cleft like a blade
    Into the gloom, and struck on Eunice sitting
       Rigid and stark upon the after thwart.
    It blazed upon their flitting
   In merciless light.  A moment so it stayed,
   Then was extinguished, and Sir Everard made
       One leap, and landed just a fraction short.


       LXI

   His weight upon the gunwale tipped the boat
    To straining balance.  Everard lurched and seized
   His wife and held her smothered to his coat.
    "Everard, loose me, we shall drown--" and squeezed
   Against him, she beat with her hands.  He gasped
    "Never, by God!"  The slidden boat gave way
       And the foamy water split--and met.
    Bubbled up through the spray
   A wailing rose and in the branches rasped,
   And creaked, and stilled.  Over the treetops, clasped
       In the blue evening, a clear moon was set.


       LXII

   They lie entangled in the twisting roots,
    Embraced forever.  Their cold marriage bed
   Close-canopied and curtained by the shoots
    Of willows and pale birches.  At the head,
   White lilies, like still swans, placidly float
    And sway above the pebbles.  Here are waves
       Sun-smitten for a threaded counterpane
    Gold-woven on their graves.
   In perfect quietness they sleep, remote
   In the green, rippled twilight.  Death has smote
       Them to perpetual oneness who were twain.




The Cremona Violin



       Part First

   Frau Concert-Meister Altgelt shut the door.
   A storm was rising, heavy gusts of wind
   Swirled through the trees, and scattered leaves before
   Her on the clean, flagged path.  The sky behind
   The distant town was, and sharp defined
   Against it shone the lines of roofs and towers,
   Superimposed and flat like cardboard flowers.

   A pasted city on a purple ground,
   Picked out with luminous paint, it seemed.  The cloud
   Split on an edge of lightning, and a sound
   Of rivers full and rushing boomed through bowed,
   Tossed, hissing branches.  Thunder rumbled loud
   Beyond the town fast swallowing into gloom.
   Frau Altgelt closed the windows of each room.

   She bustled round to shake by constant moving
   The strange, weird atmosphere.  She stirred the fire,
   She twitched the supper-cloth as though improving
   Its careful setting, then her own attire
   Came in for notice, tiptoeing higher and higher
   She peered into the wall-glass, now adjusting
   A straying lock, or else a ribbon thrusting

   This way or that to suit her.  At last sitting,
   Or rather plumping down upon a chair,
   She took her work, the stocking she was knitting,
   And watched the rain upon the window glare
   In white, bright drops.  Through the glass a flare
   Of lightning squirmed about her needles.  "Oh!"
   She cried.  "What can be keeping Theodore so!"

   A roll of thunder set the casements clapping.
   Frau Altgelt flung her work aside and ran,
   Pulled open the house door, with kerchief flapping
   She stood and gazed along the street.  A man
   Flung back the garden-gate and nearly ran
   Her down as she stood in the door.  "Why, Dear,
   What in the name of patience brings you here?

   Quick, Lotta, shut the door, my violin
   I fear is wetted.  Now, Dear, bring a light.
   This clasp is very much too worn and thin.
   I'll take the other fiddle out to-night
   If it still rains.  Tut! Tut! my child, you're quite
   Clumsy.  Here, help me, hold the case while I--
   Give me the candle.  No, the inside's dry.

   Thank God for that!  Well, Lotta, how are you?
   A bad storm, but the house still stands, I see.
   Is my pipe filled, my Dear?  I'll have a few
   Puffs and a snooze before I eat my tea.
   What do you say?  That you were feared for me?
   Nonsense, my child.  Yes, kiss me, now don't talk.
   I need a rest, the theatre's a long walk."

   Her needles still, her hands upon her lap
   Patiently laid, Charlotta Altgelt sat
   And watched the rain-run window.  In his nap
   Her husband stirred and muttered.  Seeing that,
   Charlotta rose and softly, pit-a-pat,
   Climbed up the stairs, and in her little room
   Found sighing comfort with a moon in bloom.

   But even rainy windows, silver-lit
   By a new-burst, storm-whetted moon, may give
   But poor content to loneliness, and it
   Was hard for young Charlotta so to strive
   And down her eagerness and learn to live
   In placid quiet.  While her husband slept,
   Charlotta in her upper chamber wept.

   Herr Concert-Meister Altgelt was a man
   Gentle and unambitious, that alone
   Had kept him back.  He played as few men can,
   Drawing out of his instrument a tone
   So shimmering-sweet and palpitant, it shone
   Like a bright thread of sound hung in the air,
   Afloat and swinging upward, slim and fair.

   Above all things, above Charlotta his wife,
   Herr Altgelt loved his violin, a fine
   Cremona pattern, Stradivari's life
   Was flowering out of early discipline
   When this was fashioned.  Of soft-cutting pine
   The belly was.  The back of broadly curled
   Maple, the head made thick and sharply whirled.

      The slanting, youthful sound-holes through
      The belly of fine, vigorous pine
      Mellowed each note and blew
      It out again with a woody flavour
      Tanged and fragrant as fir-trees are
      When breezes in their needles jar.

      The varnish was an orange-brown
      Lustered like glass that's long laid down
      Under a crumbling villa stone.
      Purfled stoutly, with mitres which point
      Straight up the corners.  Each curve and joint
      Clear, and bold, and thin.
      Such was Herr Theodore's violin.

   Seven o'clock, the Concert-Meister gone
   With his best violin, the rain being stopped,
   Frau Lotta in the kitchen sat alone
   Watching the embers which the fire dropped.
   The china shone upon the dresser, topped
   By polished copper vessels which her skill
   Kept brightly burnished.  It was very still.

   An air from 'Orfeo' hummed in her head.
   Herr Altgelt had been practising before
   The night's performance.  Charlotta had plead
   With him to stay with her.  Even at the door
   She'd begged him not to go.  "I do implore
   You for this evening, Theodore," she had said.
   "Leave them to-night, and stay with me instead."

   "A silly poppet!"  Theodore pinched her ear.
   "You'd like to have our good Elector turn
   Me out I think."  "But, Theodore, something queer
   Ails me.  Oh, do but notice how they burn,
   My cheeks!  The thunder worried me.  You're stern,
   And cold, and only love your work, I know.
   But Theodore, for this evening, do not go."

   But he had gone, hurriedly at the end,
   For she had kept him talking.  Now she sat
   Alone again, always alone, the trend
   Of all her thinking brought her back to that
   She wished to banish.  What would life be?  What?
   For she was young, and loved, while he was moved
   Only by music.  Each day that was proved.

   Each day he rose and practised.  While he played,
   She stopped her work and listened, and her heart
   Swelled painfully beneath her bodice.  Swayed
   And longing, she would hide from him her smart.
   "Well, Lottchen, will that do?"  Then what a start
   She gave, and she would run to him and cry,
   And he would gently chide her, "Fie, Dear, fie.

   I'm glad I played it well.  But such a taking!
   You'll hear the thing enough before I've done."
   And she would draw away from him, still shaking.
   Had he but guessed she was another one,
   Another violin.  Her strings were aching,
   Stretched to the touch of his bow hand, again
   He played and she almost broke at the strain.

   Where was the use of thinking of it now,
   Sitting alone and listening to the clock!
   She'd best make haste and knit another row.
   Three hours at least must pass before his knock
   Would startle her.  It always was a shock.
   She listened--listened--for so long before,
   That when it came her hearing almost tore.

   She caught herself just starting in to listen.
   What nerves she had:  rattling like brittle sticks!
   She wandered to the window, for the glisten
   Of a bright moon was tempting.  Snuffed the wicks
   Of her two candles.  Still she could not fix
   To anything.  The moon in a broad swath
   Beckoned her out and down the garden-path.

   Against the house, her hollyhocks stood high
   And, their shadows doubling them.  The night
   Was white and still with moonlight, and a sigh
   Of blowing leaves was there, and the dim flight
   Of insects, and the smell of aconite,
   And stocks, and Marvel of Peru.  She flitted
   Along the path, where blocks of shadow pitted

   The even flags.  She let herself go dreaming
   Of Theodore her husband, and the tune
   From 'Orfeo' swam through her mind, but seeming
   Changed--shriller.  Of a sudden, the clear moon
   Showed her a passer-by, inopportune
   Indeed, but here he was, whistling and striding.
   Lotta squeezed in between the currants, hiding.

   "The best laid plans of mice and men," alas!
   The stranger came indeed, but did not pass.
   Instead, he leant upon the garden-gate,
   Folding his arms and whistling.  Lotta's state,
   Crouched in the prickly currants, on wet grass,
   Was far from pleasant.  Still the stranger stayed,
   And Lotta in her currants watched, dismayed.

   He seemed a proper fellow standing there
   In the bright moonshine.  His cocked hat was laced
   With silver, and he wore his own brown hair
   Tied, but unpowdered.  His whole bearing graced
   A fine cloth coat, and ruffled shirt, and chased
   Sword-hilt.  Charlotta looked, but her position
   Was hardly easy.  When would his volition

   Suggest his walking on?  And then that tune!
   A half-a-dozen bars from 'Orfeo'
   Gone over and over, and murdered.  What Fortune
   Had brought him there to stare about him so?
   "Ach, Gott im Himmel!  Why will he not go!"
   Thought Lotta, but the young man whistled on,
   And seemed in no great hurry to be gone.

   Charlotta, crouched among the currant bushes,
   Watched the moon slowly dip from twig to twig.
   If Theodore should chance to come, and blushes
   Streamed over her.  He would not care a fig,
   He'd only laugh.  She pushed aside a sprig
   Of sharp-edged leaves and peered, then she uprose
   Amid her bushes.  "Sir," said she, "pray whose

   Garden do you suppose you're watching?  Why
   Do you stand there?  I really must insist
   Upon your leaving.  'Tis unmannerly
   To stay so long."  The young man gave a twist
   And turned about, and in the amethyst
   Moonlight he saw her like a nymph half-risen
   From the green bushes which had been her prison.

   He swept his hat off in a hurried bow.
   "Your pardon, Madam, I had no idea
   I was not quite alone, and that is how
   I came to stay.  My trespass was not sheer
   Impertinence.  I thought no one was here,
   And really gardens cry to be admired.
   To-night especially it seemed required.

   And may I beg to introduce myself?
   Heinrich Marohl of Munich.  And your name?"
   Charlotta told him.  And the artful elf
   Promptly exclaimed about her husband's fame.
   So Lotta, half-unwilling, slowly came
   To conversation with him.  When she went
   Into the house, she found the evening spent.

   Theodore arrived quite wearied out and teased,
   With all excitement in him burned away.
   It had gone well, he said, the audience pleased,
   And he had played his very best to-day,
   But afterwards he had been forced to stay
   And practise with the stupid ones.  His head
   Ached furiously, and he must get to bed.


       Part Second

      Herr Concert-Meister Altgelt played,
      And the four strings of his violin
      Were spinning like bees on a day in Spring.
      The notes rose into the wide sun-mote
      Which slanted through the window,
      They lay like coloured beads a-row,
      They knocked together and parted,
      And started to dance,
      Skipping, tripping, each one slipping
      Under and over the others so
      That the polychrome fire streamed like a lance
      Or a comet's tail,
      Behind them.
      Then a wail arose--crescendo--
      And dropped from off the end of the bow,
      And the dancing stopped.
      A scent of lilies filled the room,
      Long and slow.  Each large white bloom
      Breathed a sound which was holy perfume from a blessed censer,
      And the hum of an organ tone,
      And they waved like fans in a hall of stone
      Over a bier standing there in the centre, alone.
      Each lily bent slowly as it was blown.
      Like smoke they rose from the violin--
      Then faded as a swifter bowing
      Jumbled the notes like wavelets flowing
      In a splashing, pashing, rippling motion
      Between broad meadows to an ocean
      Wide as a day and blue as a flower,
      Where every hour
      Gulls dipped, and scattered, and squawked, and squealed,
      And over the marshes the Angelus pealed,
      And the prows of the fishing-boats were spattered
      With spray.
      And away a couple of frigates were starting
      To race to Java with all sails set,
      Topgallants, and royals, and stunsails, and jibs,
      And wide moonsails; and the shining rails
      Were polished so bright they sparked in the sun.
      All the sails went up with a run:
          "They call me Hanging Johnny,
             Away-i-oh;
          They call me Hanging Johnny,
             So hang, boys, hang."
      And the sun had set and the high moon whitened,
      And the ship heeled over to the breeze.
      He drew her into the shade of the sails,
      And whispered tales
      Of voyages in the China seas,
      And his arm around her
      Held and bound her.
      She almost swooned,
      With the breeze and the moon
      And the slipping sea,
      And he beside her,
      Touching her, leaning--
      The ship careening,
      With the white moon steadily shining over
      Her and her lover,
      Theodore, still her lover!

      Then a quiver fell on the crowded notes,
      And slowly floated
      A single note which spread and spread
      Till it filled the room with a shimmer like gold,
      And noises shivered throughout its length,
      And tried its strength.
      They pulled it, and tore it,
      And the stuff waned thinner, but still it bore it.
      Then a wide rent
      Split the arching tent,
      And balls of fire spurted through,
      Spitting yellow, and mauve, and blue.
      One by one they were quenched as they fell,
      Only the blue burned steadily.
      Paler and paler it grew, and--faded--away.
            Herr Altgelt stopped.

   "Well, Lottachen, my Dear, what do you say?
   I think I'm in good trim.  Now let's have dinner.
   What's this, my Love, you're very sweet to-day.
   I wonder how it happens I'm the winner
   Of so much sweetness.  But I think you're thinner;
   You're like a bag of feathers on my knee.
   Why, Lotta child, you're almost strangling me.

   I'm glad you're going out this afternoon.
   The days are getting short, and I'm so tied
   At the Court Theatre my poor little bride
   Has not much junketing I fear, but soon
   I'll ask our manager to grant a boon.
   To-night, perhaps, I'll get a pass for you,
   And when I go, why Lotta can come too.

   Now dinner, Love.  I want some onion soup
   To whip me up till that rehearsal's over.
   You know it's odd how some women can stoop!
   Fraeulein Gebnitz has taken on a lover,
   A Jew named Goldstein.  No one can discover
   If it's his money.  But she lives alone
   Practically.  Gebnitz is a stone,

   Pores over books all day, and has no ear
   For his wife's singing.  Artists must have men;
   They need appreciation.  But it's queer
   What messes people make of their lives, when
   They should know more.  If Gebnitz finds out, then
   His wife will pack.  Yes, shut the door at once.
   I did not feel it cold, I am a dunce."

   Frau Altgelt tied her bonnet on and went
   Into the streets.  A bright, crisp Autumn wind
   Flirted her skirts and hair.  A turbulent,
   Audacious wind it was, now close behind,
   Pushing her bonnet forward till it twined
   The strings across her face, then from in front
   Slantingly swinging at her with a shunt,

   Until she lay against it, struggling, pushing,
   Dismayed to find her clothing tightly bound
   Around her, every fold and wrinkle crushing
   Itself upon her, so that she was wound
   In draperies as clinging as those found
   Sucking about a sea nymph on the frieze
   Of some old Grecian temple.  In the breeze

   The shops and houses had a quality
   Of hard and dazzling colour; something sharp
   And buoyant, like white, puffing sails at sea.
   The city streets were twanging like a harp.
   Charlotta caught the movement, skippingly
   She blew along the pavement, hardly knowing
   Toward what destination she was going.

   She fetched up opposite a jeweller's shop,
   Where filigreed tiaras shone like crowns,
   And necklaces of emeralds seemed to drop
   And then float up again with lightness.  Browns
   Of striped agates struck her like cold frowns
   Amid the gaiety of topaz seals,
   Carved though they were with heads, and arms, and wheels.

   A row of pencils knobbed with quartz or sard
   Delighted her.  And rings of every size
   Turned smartly round like hoops before her eyes,
   Amethyst-flamed or ruby-girdled, jarred
   To spokes and flashing triangles, and starred
   Like rockets bursting on a festal day.
   Charlotta could not tear herself away.

   With eyes glued tightly on a golden box,
   Whose rare enamel piqued her with its hue,
   Changeable, iridescent, shuttlecocks
   Of shades and lustres always darting through
   Its level, superimposing sheet of blue,
   Charlotta did not hear footsteps approaching.
   She started at the words:  "Am I encroaching?"

   "Oh, Heinrich, how you frightened me!  I thought
   We were to meet at three, is it quite that?"
   "No, it is not," he answered, "but I've caught
   The trick of missing you.  One thing is flat,
   I cannot go on this way.  Life is what
   Might best be conjured up by the word:  'Hell'.
   Dearest, when will you come?"  Lotta, to quell

   His effervescence, pointed to the gems
   Within the window, asked him to admire
   A bracelet or a buckle.  But one stems
   Uneasily the burning of a fire.
   Heinrich was chafing, pricked by his desire.
   Little by little she wooed him to her mood
   Until at last he promised to be good.

   But here he started on another tack;
   To buy a jewel, which one would Lotta choose.
   She vainly urged against him all her lack
   Of other trinkets.  Should she dare to use
   A ring or brooch her husband might accuse
   Her of extravagance, and ask to see
   A strict accounting, or still worse might be.

   But Heinrich would not be persuaded.  Why
   Should he not give her what he liked?  And in
   He went, determined certainly to buy
   A thing so beautiful that it would win
   Her wavering fancy.  Altgelt's violin
   He would outscore by such a handsome jewel
   That Lotta could no longer be so cruel!

   Pity Charlotta, torn in diverse ways.
   If she went in with him, the shopman might
   Recognize her, give her her name; in days
   To come he could denounce her.  In her fright
   She almost fled.  But Heinrich would be quite
   Capable of pursuing.  By and by
   She pushed the door and entered hurriedly.

   It took some pains to keep him from bestowing
   A pair of ruby earrings, carved like roses,
   The setting twined to represent the growing
   Tendrils and leaves, upon her.  "Who supposes
   I could obtain such things!  It simply closes
   All comfort for me."  So he changed his mind
   And bought as slight a gift as he could find.

   A locket, frosted over with seed pearls,
   Oblong and slim, for wearing at the neck,
   Or hidden in the bosom; their joined curls
   Should lie in it.  And further to bedeck
   His love, Heinrich had picked a whiff, a fleck,
   The merest puff of a thin, linked chain
   To hang it from.  Lotta could not refrain

   From weeping as they sauntered down the street.
   She did not want the locket, yet she did.
   To have him love her she found very sweet,
   But it is hard to keep love always hid.
   Then there was something in her heart which chid
   Her, told her she loved Theodore in him,
   That all these meetings were a foolish whim.

   She thought of Theodore and the life they led,
   So near together, but so little mingled.
   The great clouds bulged and bellied overhead,
   And the fresh wind about her body tingled;
   The crane of a large warehouse creaked and jingled;
   Charlotta held her breath for very fear,
   About her in the street she seemed to hear:
       "They call me Hanging Johnny,
          Away-i-oh;
       They call me Hanging Johnny,
          So hang, boys, hang."

   And it was Theodore, under the racing skies,
   Who held her and who whispered in her ear.
   She knew her heart was telling her no lies,
   Beating and hammering.  He was so dear,
   The touch of him would send her in a queer
   Swoon that was half an ecstasy.  And yearning
   For Theodore, she wandered, slowly turning

   Street after street as Heinrich wished it so.
   He had some aim, she had forgotten what.
   Their progress was confused and very slow,
   But at the last they reached a lonely spot,
   A garden far above the highest shot
   Of soaring steeple.  At their feet, the town
   Spread open like a chequer-board laid down.

   Lotta was dimly conscious of the rest,
   Vaguely remembered how he clasped the chain
   About her neck.  She treated it in jest,
   And saw his face cloud over with sharp pain.
   Then suddenly she felt as though a strain
   Were put upon her, collared like a slave,
   Leashed in the meshes of this thing he gave.

   She seized the flimsy rings with both her hands
   To snap it, but they held with odd persistence.
   Her eyes were blinded by two wind-blown strands
   Of hair which had been loosened.  Her resistance
   Melted within her, from remotest distance,
   Misty, unreal, his face grew warm and near,
   And giving way she knew him very dear.

   For long he held her, and they both gazed down
   At the wide city, and its blue, bridged river.
   From wooing he jested with her, snipped the blown
   Strands of her hair, and tied them with a sliver
   Cut from his own head.  But she gave a shiver
   When, opening the locket, they were placed
   Under the glass, commingled and enlaced.

   "When will you have it so with us?"  He sighed.
   She shook her head.  He pressed her further.  "No,
   No, Heinrich, Theodore loves me," and she tried
   To free herself and rise.  He held her so,
   Clipped by his arms, she could not move nor go.
   "But you love me," he whispered, with his face
   Burning against her through her kerchief's lace.

   Frau Altgelt knew she toyed with fire, knew
   That what her husband lit this other man
   Fanned to hot flame.  She told herself that few
   Women were so discreet as she, who ran
   No danger since she knew what things to ban.
   She opened her house door at five o'clock,
   A short half-hour before her husband's knock.


       Part Third

   The 'Residenz-Theater' sparked and hummed
   With lights and people.  Gebnitz was to sing,
   That rare soprano.  All the fiddles strummed
   With tuning up; the wood-winds made a ring
   Of reedy bubbling noises, and the sting
   Of sharp, red brass pierced every ear-drum; patting
   From muffled tympani made a dark slatting

   Across the silver shimmering of flutes;
   A bassoon grunted, and an oboe wailed;
   The 'celli pizzicato-ed like great lutes,
   And mutterings of double basses trailed
   Away to silence, while loud harp-strings hailed
   Their thin, bright colours down in such a scatter
   They lost themselves amid the general clatter.

   Frau Altgelt in the gallery, alone,
   Felt lifted up into another world.
   Before her eyes a thousand candles shone
   In the great chandeliers.  A maze of curled
   And powdered periwigs past her eyes swirled.
   She smelt the smoke of candles guttering,
   And caught the glint of jewelled fans fluttering

   All round her in the boxes.  Red and gold,
   The house, like rubies set in filigree,
   Filliped the candlelight about, and bold
   Young sparks with eye-glasses, unblushingly
   Ogled fair beauties in the balcony.
   An officer went by, his steel spurs jangling.
   Behind Charlotta an old man was wrangling

   About a play-bill he had bought and lost.
   Three drunken soldiers had to be ejected.
   Frau Altgelt's eyes stared at the vacant post
   Of Concert-Meister, she at once detected
   The stir which brought him.  But she felt neglected
   When with no glance about him or her way,
   He lifted up his violin to play.

      The curtain went up?  Perhaps.  If so,
      Charlotta never saw it go.
      The famous Fraeulein Gebnitz' singing
      Only came to her like the ringing
      Of bells at a festa
      Which swing in the air
      And nobody realizes they are there.
      They jingle and jangle,
      And clang, and bang,
      And never a soul could tell whether they rang,
      For the plopping of guns and rockets
      And the chinking of silver to spend, in one's pockets,
      And the shuffling and clapping of feet,
      And the loud flapping
      Of flags, with the drums,
      As the military comes.
      It's a famous tune to walk to,
      And I wonder where they're off to.
      Step-step-stepping to the beating of the drums.
      But the rhythm changes as though a mist
      Were curling and twisting
      Over the landscape.
      For a moment a rhythmless, tuneless fog
      Encompasses her.  Then her senses jog
      To the breath of a stately minuet.
      Herr Altgelt's violin is set
      In tune to the slow, sweeping bows, and retreats and advances,
      To curtsies brushing the waxen floor as the Court dances.
      Long and peaceful like warm Summer nights
      When stars shine in the quiet river.  And against the lights
      Blundering insects knock,
      And the 'Rathaus' clock
      Booms twice, through the shrill sounds
      Of flutes and horns in the lamplit grounds.
      Pressed against him in the mazy wavering
      Of a country dance, with her short breath quavering
      She leans upon the beating, throbbing
      Music.  Laughing, sobbing,
      Feet gliding after sliding feet;
      His--hers--
      The ballroom blurs--
      She feels the air
      Lifting her hair,
      And the lapping of water on the stone stair.
      He is there!  He is there!
      Twang harps, and squeal, you thin violins,
      That the dancers may dance, and never discover
      The old stone stair leading down to the river
      With the chestnut-tree branches hanging over
      Her and her lover.
      Theodore, still her lover!

   The evening passed like this, in a half faint,
   Delirium with waking intervals
   Which were the entr'acts.  Under the restraint
   Of a large company, the constant calls
   For oranges or syrops from the stalls
   Outside, the talk, the passing to and fro,
   Lotta sat ill at ease, incognito.

   She heard the Gebnitz praised, the tenor lauded,
   The music vaunted as most excellent.
   The scenery and the costumes were applauded,
   The latter it was whispered had been sent
   From Italy.  The Herr Direktor spent
   A fortune on them, so the gossips said.
   Charlotta felt a lightness in her head.

   When the next act began, her eyes were swimming,
   Her prodded ears were aching and confused.
   The first notes from the orchestra sent skimming
   Her outward consciousness.  Her brain was fused
   Into the music, Theodore's music!  Used
   To hear him play, she caught his single tone.
   For all she noticed they two were alone.


       Part Fourth

   Frau Altgelt waited in the chilly street,
   Hustled by lackeys who ran up and down
   Shouting their coachmen's names; forced to retreat
   A pace or two by lurching chairmen; thrown
   Rudely aside by linkboys; boldly shown
   The ogling rapture in two bleary eyes
   Thrust close to hers in most unpleasant wise.

   Escaping these, she hit a liveried arm,
   Was sworn at by this glittering gentleman
   And ordered off.  However, no great harm
   Came to her.  But she looked a trifle wan
   When Theodore, her belated guardian,
   Emerged.  She snuggled up against him, trembling,
   Half out of fear, half out of the assembling

   Of all the thoughts and needs his playing had given.
   Had she enjoyed herself, he wished to know.
   "Oh! Theodore, can't you feel that it was Heaven!"
   "Heaven!  My Lottachen, and was it so?
   Gebnitz was in good voice, but all the flow
   Of her last aria was spoiled by Klops,
   A wretched flutist, she was mad as hops."

   He was so simple, so matter-of-fact,
   Charlotta Altgelt knew not what to say
   To bring him to her dream.  His lack of tact
   Kept him explaining all the homeward way
   How this thing had gone well, that badly.  "Stay,
   Theodore!" she cried at last.  "You know to me
   Nothing was real, it was an ecstasy."

   And he was heartily glad she had enjoyed
   Herself so much, and said so.  "But it's good
   To be got home again."  He was employed
   In looking at his violin, the wood
   Was old, and evening air did it no good.
   But when he drew up to the table for tea
   Something about his wife's vivacity

   Struck him as hectic, worried him in short.
   He talked of this and that but watched her close.
   Tea over, he endeavoured to extort
   The cause of her excitement.  She arose
   And stood beside him, trying to compose
   Herself, all whipt to quivering, curdled life,
   And he, poor fool, misunderstood his wife.

   Suddenly, broken through her anxious grasp,
   Her music-kindled love crashed on him there.
   Amazed, he felt her fling against him, clasp
   Her arms about him, weighing down his chair,
   Sobbing out all her hours of despair.
   "Theodore, a woman needs to hear things proved.
   Unless you tell me, I feel I'm not loved."

   Theodore went under in this tearing wave,
   He yielded to it, and its headlong flow
   Filled him with all the energy she gave.
   He was a youth again, and this bright glow,
   This living, vivid joy he had to show
   Her what she was to him.  Laughing and crying,
   She asked assurances there's no denying.

   Over and over again her questions, till
   He quite convinced her, every now and then
   She kissed him, shivering as though doubting still.
   But later when they were composed and when
   She dared relax her probings, "Lottachen,"
   He asked, "how is it your love has withstood
   My inadvertence?  I was made of wood."

   She told him, and no doubt she meant it truly,
   That he was sun, and grass, and wind, and sky
   To her.  And even if conscience were unruly
   She salved it by neat sophistries, but why
   Suppose her insincere, it was no lie
   She said, for Heinrich was as much forgot
   As though he'd never been within earshot.

   But Theodore's hands in straying and caressing
   Fumbled against the locket where it lay
   Upon her neck.  "What is this thing I'm pressing?"
   He asked.  "Let's bring it to the light of day."
   He lifted up the locket.  "It should stay
   Outside, my Dear.  Your mother has good taste.
   To keep it hidden surely is a waste."

   Pity again Charlotta, straight
   Out of her happiness.  The locket brought
   A chilly jet of truth upon her, soused
   Under its icy spurting she was caught,
   And choked, and frozen.  Suddenly she sought
   The clasp, but with such art was this contrived
   Her fumbling fingers never once arrived

   Upon it.  Feeling, twisting, round and round,
   She pulled the chain quite through the locket's ring
   And still it held.  Her neck, encompassed, bound,
   Chafed at the sliding meshes.  Such a thing
   To hurl her out of joy!  A gilded string
   Binding her folly to her, and those curls
   Which lay entwined beneath the clustered pearls!

   Again she tried to break the cord.  It stood.
   "Unclasp it, Theodore," she begged.  But he
   Refused, and being in a happy mood,
   Twitted her with her inefficiency,
   Then looking at her very seriously:
   "I think, Charlotta, it is well to have
   Always about one what a mother gave.

   As she has taken the great pains to send
   This jewel to you from Dresden, it will be
   Ingratitude if you do not intend
   To carry it about you constantly.
   With her fine taste you cannot disagree,
   The locket is most beautifully designed."
   He opened it and there the curls were, twined.

   Charlotta's heart dropped beats like knitting-stitches.
   She burned a moment, flaming; then she froze.
   Her face was jerked by little, nervous twitches,
   She heard her husband asking:  "What are those?"
   Put out her hand quickly to interpose,
   But stopped, the gesture half-complete, astounded
   At the calm way the question was propounded.

   "A pretty fancy, Dear, I do declare.
   Indeed I will not let you put it off.
   A lovely thought:  yours and your mother's hair!"
   Charlotta hid a gasp under a cough.
   "Never with my connivance shall you doff
   This charming gift."  He kissed her on the cheek,
   And Lotta suffered him, quite crushed and meek.

   When later in their room she lay awake,
   Watching the moonlight slip along the floor,
   She felt the chain and wept for Theodore's sake.
   She had loved Heinrich also, and the core
   Of truth, unlovely, startled her.  Wherefore
   She vowed from now to break this double life
   And see herself only as Theodore's wife.


       Part Fifth

   It was no easy matter to convince
   Heinrich that it was finished.  Hard to say
   That though they could not meet (he saw her wince)
   She still must keep the locket to allay
   Suspicion in her husband.  She would pay
   Him from her savings bit by bit--the oath
   He swore at that was startling to them both.

   Her resolution taken, Frau Altgelt
   Adhered to it, and suffered no regret.
   She found her husband all that she had felt
   His music to contain.  Her days were set
   In his as though she were an amulet
   Cased in bright gold.  She joyed in her confining;
   Her eyes put out her looking-glass with shining.

   Charlotta was so gay that old, dull tasks
   Were furbished up to seem like rituals.
   She baked and brewed as one who only asks
   The right to serve.  Her daily manuals
   Of prayer were duties, and her festivals
   When Theodore praised some dish, or frankly said
   She had a knack in making up a bed.

   So Autumn went, and all the mountains round
   The city glittered white with fallen snow,
   For it was Winter.  Over the hard ground
   Herr Altgelt's footsteps came, each one a blow.
   On the swept flags behind the currant row
   Charlotta stood to greet him.  But his lip
   Only flicked hers.  His Concert-Meistership

   Was first again.  This evening he had got
   Important news.  The opera ordered from
   Young Mozart was arrived.  That old despot,
   The Bishop of Salzburg, had let him come
   Himself to lead it, and the parts, still hot
   From copying, had been tried over.  Never
   Had any music started such a fever.

   The orchestra had cheered till they were hoarse,
   The singers clapped and clapped.  The town was made,
   With such a great attraction through the course
   Of Carnival time.  In what utter shade
   All other cities would be left!  The trade
   In music would all drift here naturally.
   In his excitement he forgot his tea.

   Lotta was forced to take his cup and put
   It in his hand.  But still he rattled on,
   Sipping at intervals.  The new catgut
   Strings he was using gave out such a tone
   The "Maestro" had remarked it, and had gone
   Out of his way to praise him.  Lotta smiled,
   He was as happy as a little child.

   From that day on, Herr Altgelt, more and more,
   Absorbed himself in work.  Lotta at first
   Was patient and well-wishing.  But it wore
   Upon her when two weeks had brought no burst
   Of loving from him.  Then she feared the worst;
   That his short interest in her was a light
   Flared up an instant only in the night.

   'Idomeneo' was the opera's name,
   A name that poor Charlotta learnt to hate.
   Herr Altgelt worked so hard he seldom came
   Home for his tea, and it was very late,
   Past midnight sometimes, when he knocked.  His state
   Was like a flabby orange whose crushed skin
   Is thin with pulling, and all dented in.

   He practised every morning and her heart
   Followed his bow.  But often she would sit,
   While he was playing, quite withdrawn apart,
   Absently fingering and touching it,
   The locket, which now seemed to her a bit
   Of some gone youth.  His music drew her tears,
   And through the notes he played, her dreading ears

   Heard Heinrich's voice, saying he had not changed;
   Beer merchants had no ecstasies to take
   Their minds off love.  So far her thoughts had ranged
   Away from her stern vow, she chanced to take
   Her way, one morning, quite by a mistake,
   Along the street where Heinrich had his shop.
   What harm to pass it since she should not stop!

   It matters nothing how one day she met
   Him on a bridge, and blushed, and hurried by.
   Nor how the following week he stood to let
   Her pass, the pavement narrowing suddenly.
   How once he took her basket, and once he
   Pulled back a rearing horse who might have struck
   Her with his hoofs.  It seemed the oddest luck

   How many times their business took them each
   Right to the other.  Then at last he spoke,
   But she would only nod, he got no speech
   From her.  Next time he treated it in joke,
   And that so lightly that her vow she broke
   And answered.  So they drifted into seeing
   Each other as before.  There was no fleeing.

   Christmas was over and the Carnival
   Was very near, and tripping from each tongue
   Was talk of the new opera.  Each book-stall
   Flaunted it out in bills, what airs were sung,
   What singers hired.  Pictures of the young
   "Maestro" were for sale.  The town was mad.
   Only Charlotta felt depressed and sad.

   Each day now brought a struggle 'twixt her will
   And Heinrich's.  'Twixt her love for Theodore
   And him.  Sometimes she wished to kill
   Herself to solve her problem.  For a score
   Of reasons Heinrich tempted her.  He bore
   Her moods with patience, and so surely urged
   Himself upon her, she was slowly merged

   Into his way of thinking, and to fly
   With him seemed easy.  But next morning would
   The Stradivarius undo her mood.
   Then she would realize that she must cleave
   Always to Theodore.  And she would try
   To convince Heinrich she should never leave,
   And afterwards she would go home and grieve.

   All thought in Munich centered on the part
   Of January when there would be given
   'Idomeneo' by Wolfgang Mozart.
   The twenty-ninth was fixed.  And all seats, even
   Those almost at the ceiling, which were driven
   Behind the highest gallery, were sold.
   The inches of the theatre went for gold.

   Herr Altgelt was a shadow worn so thin
   With work, he hardly printed behind
   The candle.  He and his old violin
   Made up one person.  He was not unkind,
   But dazed outside his playing, and the rind,
   The pine and maple of his fiddle, guarded
   A part of him which he had quite discarded.

      It woke in the silence of frost-bright nights,
      In little lights,
      Like will-o'-the-wisps flickering, fluttering,
      Here--there--
      Spurting, sputtering,
      Fading and lighting,
      Together, asunder--
      Till Lotta sat up in bed with wonder,
      And the faint grey patch of the window shone
      Upon her sitting there, alone.
      For Theodore slept.

   The twenty-eighth was last rehearsal day,
   'Twas called for noon, so early morning meant
   Herr Altgelt's only time in which to play
   His part alone.  Drawn like a monk who's spent
   Himself in prayer and fasting, Theodore went
   Into the kitchen, with a weary word
   Of cheer to Lotta, careless if she heard.

      Lotta heard more than his spoken word.
      She heard the vibrating of strings and wood.
      She was washing the dishes, her hands all suds,
      When the sound began,
      Long as the span
      Of a white road snaking about a hill.
      The orchards are filled
      With cherry blossoms at butterfly poise.
      Hawthorn buds are cracking,
      And in the distance a shepherd is clacking
      His shears, snip-snipping the wool from his sheep.
      The notes are asleep,
      Lying adrift on the air
      In level lines
      Like sunlight hanging in pines and pines,
      Strung and threaded,
      All imbedded
      In the blue-green of the hazy pines.
      Lines--long, straight lines!
      And stems,
      Long, straight stems
      Pushing up
      To the cup of blue, blue sky.
      Stems growing misty
      With the many of them,
      Red-green mist
      Of the trees,
      And these
      Wood-flavoured notes.
      The back is maple and the belly is pine.
      The rich notes twine
      As though weaving in and out of leaves,
      Broad leaves
      Flapping slowly like elephants' ears,
      Waving and falling.
      Another sound peers
      Through little pine fingers,
      And lingers, peeping.
      Ping!  Ping!  pizzicato, something is cheeping.
      There is a twittering up in the branches,
      A chirp and a lilt,
      And crimson atilt on a swaying twig.
      Wings!  Wings!
      And a little ruffled-out throat which sings.
      The forest bends, tumultuous
      With song.
      The woodpecker knocks,
      And the song-sparrow trills,
      Every fir, and cedar, and yew
      Has a nest or a bird,
      It is quite absurd
      To hear them cutting across each other:
      Peewits, and thrushes, and larks, all at once,
      And a loud cuckoo is trying to smother
      A wood-pigeon perched on a birch,
      "Roo--coo--oo--oo--"
      "Cuckoo!  Cuckoo!  That's one for you!"
      Abird whistles, how sharp, how shrill!
      And the great trees toss
      And leaves blow down,
      You can almost hear them splash on the ground.
      The whistle again:
      It is double and loud!
      The leaves are splashing,
      And water is dashing
      Over those creepers, for they are shrouds;
      And men are running up them to furl the sails,
      For there is a capful of wind to-day,
      And we are already well under way.
      The deck is aslant in the bubbling breeze.
      "Theodore, please.
      Oh, Dear, how you tease!"
      And the boatswain's whistle sounds again,
      And the men pull on the sheets:
          "My name is Hanging Johnny,
             Away-i-oh;
          They call me Hanging Johnny,
             So hang, boys, hang."
      The trees of the forest are masts, tall masts;
      They are swinging over
      Her and her lover.
      Almost swooning
      Under the ballooning canvas,
      She lies
      Looking up in his eyes
      As he bends farther over.
      Theodore, still her lover!

   The suds were dried upon Charlotta's hands,
   She leant against the table for support,
   Wholly forgotten.  Theodore's eyes were brands
   Burning upon his music.  He stopped short.
   Charlotta almost heard the sound of bands
   Snapping.  She put one hand up to her heart,
   Her fingers touched the locket with a start.

   Herr Altgelt put his violin away
   Listlessly.  "Lotta, I must have some rest.
   The strain will be a hideous one to-day.
   Don't speak to me at all.  It will be best
   If I am quiet till I go."  And lest
   She disobey, he left her.  On the stairs
   She heard his mounting steps.  What use were prayers!

   He could not hear, he was not there, for she
   Was married to a mummy, a machine.
   Her hand closed on the locket bitterly.
   Before her, on a chair, lay the shagreen
   Case of his violin.  She saw the clean
   Sun flash the open clasp.  The locket's edge
   Cut at her fingers like a pushing wedge.

   A heavy cart went by, a distant bell
   Chimed ten, the fire flickered in the grate.
   She was alone.  Her throat began to swell
   With sobs.  What kept her here, why should she wait?
   The violin she had begun to hate
   Lay in its case before her.  Here she flung
   The cover open.  With the fiddle swung

   Over her head, the hanging clock's loud ticking
   Caught on her ear.  'Twas slow, and as she paused
   The little door in it came open, flicking
   A wooden cuckoo out:  "Cuckoo!"  It caused
   The forest dream to come again.  "Cuckoo!"
   Smashed on the grate, the violin broke in two.

   "Cuckoo!  Cuckoo!" the clock kept striking on;
   But no one listened.  Frau Altgelt had gone.




The Cross-Roads



A bullet through his heart at dawn.  On the table a letter signed with a
woman's name.  A wind that goes howling round the house, and weeping as
in shame.  Cold November dawn peeping through the windows, cold dawn
creeping over the floor, creeping up his cold legs, creeping over his
cold body, creeping across his cold face. A glaze of thin yellow
sunlight on the staring eyes.  Wind howling through bent branches.  A
wind which never dies down.  Howling, wailing. The gazing eyes glitter
in the sunlight.  The lids are frozen open and the eyes glitter.


The thudding of a pick on hard earth.  A spade grinding and crunching.
Overhead, branches writhing, winding, interlacing, unwinding,
scattering; tortured twinings, tossings, creakings.  Wind flinging
branches apart, drawing them together, whispering and whining among
them.  A waning, lopsided moon cutting through clouds.  A stream
of pebbles and earth and the empty spade gleams clear in the moonlight,
then is rammed again into the earth.  Tramping of feet.  Men and
horses. Squeaking of wheels.

"Whoa!  Ready, Jim?"

"All ready."

Something falls, settles, is still.  Suicides have no coffin.

"Give us the stake, Jim.  Now."

Pound!  Pound!

"He'll never walk.  Nailed to the ground."

An ash stick pierces his heart, if it buds the roots will hold him. He
is a part of the earth now, clay to clay.  Overhead the branches sway,
and writhe, and twist in the wind.  He'll never walk with a bullet in
his heart, and an ash stick nailing him to the cold, ground.


Six months he lay still.  Six months.  And the water welled up in his
body, and soft blue spots chequered it.  He lay still, for the ash stick
held him in place.  Six months!  Then her face came out of a mist of
green. Pink and white and frail like Dresden china, lilies-of-the-valley
at her breast, puce-coloured silk sheening about her.  Under the young
green leaves, the horse at a foot-pace, the high yellow wheels of the
chaise scarcely turning, her face, rippling like grain a-blowing, under
her puce-coloured bonnet; and burning beside her, flaming within his
correct blue coat and brass buttons, is someone.  What has dimmed the
sun? The horse steps on a rolling stone; a wind in the branches makes a
moan. The little leaves tremble and shake, turn and quake, over and
over, tearing their stems.  There is a shower of young leaves, and a
sudden-sprung gale wails in the trees.

The yellow-wheeled chaise is rocking--rocking, and all the branches
are knocking--knocking.  The sun in the sky is a flat, red plate, the
branches creak and grate.  She screams and cowers, for the green foliage
is a lowering wave surging to smother her.  But she sees nothing. The
stake holds firm.  The body writhes, the body squirms. The blue spots
widen, the flesh tears, but the stake wears well in the deep,
ground.  It holds the body in the still, ground.


Two years!  The body has been in the ground two years.  It is worn away;
it is clay to clay.  Where the heart moulders, a greenish dust, the
stake is thrust.  Late August it is, and night; a night flauntingly
jewelled with stars, a night of shooting stars and loud insect noises.
Down the road to Tilbury, silence--and the slow flapping of large
leaves. Down the road to Sutton, silence--and the darkness of
heavy-foliaged trees. Down the road to Wayfleet, silence--and the
whirring scrape of insects in the branches.  Down the road to
Edgarstown, silence--and stars like stepping-stones in a pathway
overhead.  It is very quiet at the cross-roads, and the sign-board
points the way down the four roads, endlessly points the way where
nobody wishes to go.

A horse is galloping, galloping up from Sutton.  Shaking the wide, still
leaves as he goes under them.  Striking sparks with his iron shoes;
silencing the katydids.  Dr. Morgan riding to a child-birth over Tilbury
way; riding to deliver a woman of her first-born son.  One o'clock from
Wayfleet bell tower, what a shower of shooting stars!  And a breeze all
of a sudden, jarring the big leaves and making them jerk up and down.
Dr. Morgan's hat is blown from his head, the horse swerves, and curves
away from the sign-post.  An oath--spurs--a blurring of grey mist. A
quick left twist, and the gelding is snorting and racing down the
Tilbury road with the wind dropping away behind him.

The stake has wrenched, the stake has started, the body, flesh from
flesh, has parted.  But the bones hold tight, socket and ball, and
clamping them down in the hard, ground is the stake, wedged
through ribs and spine. The bones may twist, and heave, and twine, but
the stake holds them still in line.  The breeze goes down, and the round
stars shine, for the stake holds the fleshless bones in line.


Twenty years now!  Twenty long years!  The body has powdered itself
away; it is clay to clay.  It is brown earth mingled with brown earth.
Only flaky bones remain, lain together so long they fit, although not
one bone is knit to another.  The stake is there too, rotted through,
but upright still, and still piercing down between ribs and spine in a
straight line.

Yellow stillness is on the cross-roads, yellow stillness is on the
trees. The leaves hang drooping, wan.  The four roads point four yellow
ways, saffron and gamboge ribbons to the gaze.  A little swirl of dust
blows up Tilbury road, the wind which fans it has not strength to do
more; it ceases, and the dust settles down.  A little whirl of wind
comes up Tilbury road.  It brings a sound of wheels and feet. The wind
reels a moment and faints to nothing under the sign-post. Wind again,
wheels and feet louder.  Wind again--again--again. A drop of rain,
flat into the dust.  Drop!--Drop!  Thick heavy raindrops, and a
shrieking wind bending the great trees and wrenching off their leaves.

Under the sky, bowed and dripping with rain, up Tilbury road,
comes the procession.  A funeral procession, bound for the graveyard at
Wayfleet.  Feet and wheels--feet and wheels.  And among them one who
is carried.

The bones in the deep, still earth shiver and pull.  There is a quiver
through the rotted stake.  Then stake and bones fall together in a
little puffing of dust.

Like meshes of linked steel the rain shuts down behind the procession,
now well along the Wayfleet road.

He wavers like smoke in the buffeting wind.  His fingers blow out like
smoke, his head ripples in the gale.  Under the sign-post, in the
pouring rain, he stands, and watches another quavering figure drifting
down the Wayfleet road.  Then swiftly he streams after it.  It flickers
among the trees.  He licks out and winds about them.  Over, under,
blown, contorted.  Spindrift after spindrift; smoke following smoke.
There is a wailing through the trees, a wailing of fear, and after it
laughter--laughter--laughter, skirling up to the sky.
Lightning jags over the funeral procession.  A heavy clap of thunder.
Then darkness and rain, and the sound of feet and wheels.





A Roxbury Garden



       I

     Hoops

   Blue and pink sashes,
   Criss-cross shoes,
   Minna and Stella run out into the garden
   To play at hoop.

   Up and down the garden-paths they race,
   In the yellow sunshine,
   Each with a big round hoop
   White as a stripped willow-wand.

   Round and round turn the hoops,
   Their diamond whiteness cleaving the yellow sunshine.
   The gravel crunches and squeaks beneath them,
   And a large pebble springs them into the air
   To go whirling for a foot or two
   Before they touch the earth again
   In a series of little jumps.

   Spring, Hoops!
   Spit out a shower of blue and white brightness.
   The little criss-cross shoes twinkle behind you,
   The pink and blue sashes flutter like flags,
   The hoop-sticks are ready to beat you.
   Turn, turn, Hoops!  In the yellow sunshine.
   Turn your stripped willow whiteness
   Along the smooth paths.

   Stella sings:
      "Round and round, rolls my hoop,
      Scarcely touching the ground,
      With a swoop,
      And a bound,
      Round and round.
      With a bumpety, crunching, scattering sound,
      Down the garden it flies;
      In our eyes
      The sun lies.
      See it spin
      Out and in;
      Through the paths it goes whirling,
      About the beds curling.
      Sway now to the loop,
      Faster, faster, my hoop.
      Round you come,
      Up you come,
      Quick and straight as before.
      Run, run, my hoop, run,
      Away from the sun."

   And the great hoop bounds along the path,
   Leaping into the wind-bright air.

   Minna sings:
      "Turn, hoop,
      Burn hoop,
      Twist and twine
      Hoop of mine.
      Flash along,
      Leap along,
      Right at the sun.
      Run, hoop, run.
      Faster and faster,
      Whirl, twirl.
      Wheel like fire,
      And spin like glass;
      Fire's no whiter
      Glass is no brighter.
      Dance,
      Prance,
      Over and over,
      About and about,
      With the top of you under,
      And the bottom at top,
      But never a stop.
      Turn about, hoop, to the tap of my stick,
      I follow behind you
      To touch and remind you.
      Burn and glitter, so white and quick,
      Round and round, to the tap of a stick."

   The hoop flies along between the flower-beds,
   Swaying the flowers with the wind of its passing.

   Beside the foxglove-border roll the hoops,
   And the little pink and white bells shake and jingle
   Up and down their tall spires;
   They roll under the snow-ball bush,
   And the ground behind them is strewn with white petals;
   They swirl round a corner,
   And jar a bee out of a Canterbury bell;
   They cast their shadows for an instant
   Over a bed of pansies,
   Catch against the spurs of a columbine,
   Jostle the quietness from a cluster of monk's-hood.
   Pat! Pat! behind them come the little criss-cross shoes,
   And the blue and pink sashes stream out in flappings of colour.

   Stella sings:
      "Hoop, hoop,
      Roll along,
      Faster bowl along,
      Hoop.
      Slow, to the turning,
      Now go!--Go!
      Quick!
      Here's the stick.
      Rat-a-tap-tap it,
      Pat it, flap it.
      Fly like a bird or a yellow-backed bee,
      See how soon you can reach that tree.
      Here is a path that is perfectly straight.
      Roll along, hoop, or we shall be late."

   Minna sings:
      "Trip about, slip about, whip about
      Hoop.
      Wheel like a top at its quickest spin,
      Then, dear hoop, we shall surely win.
      First to the greenhouse and then to the wall
      Circle and circle,
      And let the wind push you,
      Poke you,
      Brush you,
      And not let you fall.
      Whirring you round like a wreath of mist.
      Hoopety hoop,
      Twist,
      Twist."

   Tap! Tap! go the hoop-sticks,
   And the hoops bowl along under a grape arbour.
   For an instant their willow whiteness is green,
   Pale white-green.
   Then they are out in the sunshine,
   Leaving the half-formed grape clusters
   A-tremble under their big leaves.

   "I will beat you, Minna," cries Stella,
   Hitting her hoop smartly with her stick.
   "Stella, Stella, we are winning," calls Minna,
   As her hoop curves round a bed of clove-pinks.
   A humming-bird whizzes past Stella's ear,
   And two or three yellow-and butterflies
   Flutter, startled, out of a pillar rose.
   Round and round race the little girls
   After their great white hoops.

   Suddenly Minna stops.
   Her hoop wavers an instant,
   But she catches it up on her stick.
   "Listen, Stella!"
   Both the little girls are listening;
   And the scents of the garden rise up quietly about them.
   "It's the chaise!  It's Father!
   Perhaps he's brought us a book from Boston."
   Twinkle, twinkle, the little criss-cross shoes
   Up the garden path.
   Blue--pink--an instant, against the syringa hedge.
   But the hoops, white as stripped willow-wands,
   Lie in the grass,
   And the grasshoppers jump back and forth
   Over them.


       II

     Battledore and Shuttlecock

   The shuttlecock soars upward
   In a parabola of whiteness,
   Turns,
   And sinks to a perfect arc.
   Plat! the battledore strikes it,
   And it rises again,
   Without haste,
   Winged and curving,
   Tracing its white flight
   Against the clipped hemlock-trees.
   Plat!
   Up again,
   Orange and sparkling with sun,
   Rounding under the blue sky,
   Dropping,
   Fading to grey-green
   In the shadow of the coned hemlocks.
   "Ninety-one."  "Ninety-two."  "Ninety-three."
   The arms of the little girls
   Come up--and up--
   Precisely,
   Like mechanical toys.
   The battledores beat at nothing,
   And toss the dazzle of snow
   Off their parchment drums.
   "Ninety-four."  Plat!
   "Ninety-five."  Plat!
   Back and forth
   Goes the shuttlecock,
   Icicle-white,
   Leaping at the sharp-edged clouds,
   Overturning,
   Falling,
   Down,
   And down,
   Tinctured with pink
   From the upthrusting shine
   Of Oriental poppies.

   The little girls sway to the counting rhythm;
   Left foot,
   Right foot.
   Plat!  Plat!
   Yellow heat twines round the handles of the battledores,
   The parchment cracks with dryness;
   But the shuttlecock
   Swings slowly into the ice-blue sky,
   Heaving up on the warm air
   Like a foam-bubble on a wave,
   With feathers slanted and sustaining.
   Higher,
   Until the earth turns beneath it;
   Poised and swinging,
   With all the garden flowing beneath it,
   Scarlet, and blue, and purple, and white--
   Blurred colour reflections in rippled water--
   Changing--streaming--
   For the moment that Stella takes to lift her arm.
   Then the shuttlecock relinquishes,
   Bows,
   Descends;
   And the sharp blue spears of the air
   Thrust it to earth.

   Again it mounts,
   Stepping up on the rising scents of flowers,
   Buoyed up and under by the shining heat.
   Above the foxgloves,
   Above the guelder-roses,
   Above the greenhouse glitter,
   Till the shafts of cooler air
   Meet it,
   Deflect it,
   Reject it,
   Then down,
   Down,
   Past the greenhouse,
   Past the guelder-rose bush,
   Past the foxgloves.

   "Ninety-nine," Stella's battledore springs to the impact.
   Plunk!  Like the snap of a taut string.
   "Oh!  Minna!"
   The shuttlecock drops zigzagedly,
   Out of orbit,
   Hits the path,
   And rolls over quite still.
   Dead white feathers,
   With a weight at the end.


       III

     Garden Games

   The tall clock is striking twelve;
   And the little girls stop in the hall to watch it,
   And the big ships rocking in a half-circle
   Above the dial.
   Twelve o'clock!
   Down the side steps
   Go the little girls,
   Under their big round straw hats.
   Minna's has a pink ribbon,
   Stella's a blue,
   That is the way they know which is which.
   Twelve o'clock!
   An hour yet before dinner.
   Mother is busy in the still-room,
   And Hannah is making gingerbread.

   Slowly, with lagging steps,
   They follow the garden-path,
   Crushing a leaf of box for its acrid smell,
   Discussing what they shall do,
   And doing nothing.

   "Stella, see that grasshopper
   Climbing up the bank!
   What a jump!
   Almost as long as my arm."
   Run, children, run.
   For the grasshopper is leaping away,
   In half-circle curves,
   Shuttlecock curves,
   Over the grasses.
   Hand in hand, the little girls call to him:
      "Grandfather, grandfather gray,
      Give me molasses, or I'll throw you away."

   The grasshopper leaps into the sunlight,
   Golden-green,
   And is gone.

   "Let's catch a bee."
   Round whirl the little girls,
   And up the garden.
   Two heads are thrust among the Canterbury bells,
   Listening,
   And fingers clasp and unclasp behind backs
   In a strain of silence.

   White bells,
   Blue bells,
   Hollow and reflexed.
   Deep tunnels of blue and white dimness,
   Cool wine-tunnels for bees.
   There is a floundering and buzzing over Minna's head.

   "Bend it down, Stella.  Quick!  Quick!"
   The wide mouth of a blossom
   Is pressed together in Minna's fingers.
   The stem flies up, jiggling its flower-bells,
   And Minna holds the dark blue cup in her hand,
   With the bee
   Imprisoned in it.
   Whirr! Buzz! Bump!
   Bump! Whiz! Bang!
   BANG!!
   The blue flower tears across like paper,
   And a gold bee darts away in the sunshine.

   "If we could fly, we could catch him."
   The sunshine is hot on Stella's upturned face,
   As she stares after the bee.
   "We'll follow him in a dove chariot.
   Come on, Stella."
   Run, children,
   Along the red gravel paths,
   For a bee is hard to catch,
   Even with a chariot of doves.

   Tall, still, and cowled,
   Stand the monk's-hoods;
   Taller than the heads of the little girls.
   A blossom for Minna.
   A blossom for Stella.
   Off comes the cowl,
   And there is a purple-painted chariot;
   Off comes the forward petal,
   And there are two little green doves,
   With green traces tying them to the chariot.
   "Now we will get in, and fly right up to the clouds.
      Fly, Doves, up in the sky,
      With Minna and me,
      After the bee."

   Up one path,
   Down another,
   Run the little girls,
   Holding their dove chariots in front of them;
   But the bee is hidden in the trumpet of a honeysuckle,
   With his wings folded along his back.

   The dove chariots are thrown away,
   And the little girls wander slowly through the garden,
   Sucking the salvia tips,
   And squeezing the snapdragons
   To make them gape.
   "I'm so hot,
   Let's pick a pansy
   And see the little man in his bath,
   And play we're he."
   A royal bath-tub,
   Hung with purple stuffs and yellow.
   The great purple-yellow wings
   Rise up behind the little red and green man;
   The purple-yellow wings fan him,
   He dabbles his feet in cool green.
   Off with the green sheath,
   And there are two spindly legs.
   "Heigho!" sighs Minna.
   "Heigho!" sighs Stella.
   There is not a flutter of wind,
   And the sun is directly overhead.

   Along the edge of the garden
   Walk the little girls.
   Their hats, round and yellow like cheeses,
   Are dangling by the ribbons.
   The grass is a tumult of buttercups and daisies;
   Buttercups and daisies streaming away
   Up the hill.
   The garden is purple, and pink, and orange, and scarlet;
   The garden is hot with colours.
   But the meadow is only yellow, and white, and green,
   Cool, and long, and quiet.
   The little girls pick buttercups
   And hold them under each other's chins.
   "You're as gold as Grandfather's snuff-box.
   You're going to be very rich, Minna."
   "Oh-o-o!  Then I'll ask my husband to give me a pair of garnet earrings
   Just like Aunt Nancy's.
   I wonder if he will.
   I know.  We'll tell fortunes.
   That's what we'll do."
   Plump down in the meadow grass,
   Stella and Minna,
   With their round yellow hats,
   Like cheeses,
   Beside them.
   Drop,
   Drop,
   Daisy petals.
      "One I love,
      Two I love,
      Three I love I say..."
   The ground is peppered with daisy petals,
   And the little girls nibble the golden centres,
   And play it is cake.

   A bell rings.
   Dinner-time;
   And after dinner there are lessons.




1777



       I

     The Trumpet-Vine Arbour

   The throats of the little red trumpet-flowers are wide open,
   And the clangour of brass beats against the hot sunlight.
   They bray and blare at the burning sky.
   Red!  Red!  Coarse notes of red,
   Trumpeted at the blue sky.
   In long streaks of sound, molten metal,
   The vine declares itself.
   Clang!--from its red and yellow trumpets.
   Clang!--from its long, nasal trumpets,
   Splitting the sunlight into ribbons, tattered and shot with noise.

   I sit in the cool arbour, in a green-and-gold twilight.
   It is very still, for I cannot hear the trumpets,
   I only know that they are red and open,
   And that the sun above the arbour shakes with heat.
   My quill is newly mended,
   And makes fine-drawn lines with its point.
   Down the long, white paper it makes little lines,
   Just lines--up--down--criss-cross.
   My heart is strained out at the pin-point of my quill;
   It is thin and writhing like the marks of the pen.
   My hand marches to a squeaky tune,
   It marches down the paper to a squealing of fifes.
   My pen and the trumpet-flowers,
   And Washington's armies away over the smoke-tree to the Southwest.
   "Yankee Doodle," my Darling!  It is you against the British,
   Marching in your ragged shoes to batter down King George.
   What have you got in your hat?  Not a feather, I wager.
   Just a hay-straw, for it is the harvest you are fighting for.
   Hay in your hat, and the whites of their eyes for a target!
   Like Bunker Hill, two years ago, when I watched all day from the house-top
   Through Father's spy-glass.
   The red city, and the blue, bright water,
   And puffs of smoke which you made.
   Twenty miles away,
   Round by Cambridge, or over the Neck,
   But the smoke was white--white!
   To-day the trumpet-flowers are red--red--
   And I cannot see you fighting,
   But old Mr. Dimond has fled to Canada,
   And Myra sings "Yankee Doodle" at her milking.
   The red throats of the trumpets bray and clang in the sunshine,
   And the smoke-tree puffs dun blossoms into the blue air.


       II

     The City of Falling Leaves

   Leaves fall,
   Brown leaves,
   Yellow leaves streaked with brown.
   They fall,
   Flutter,
   Fall again.
   The brown leaves,
   And the streaked yellow leaves,
   Loosen on their branches
   And drift slowly downwards.
   One,
   One, two, three,
   One, two, five.
   All Venice is a falling of Autumn leaves--
   Brown,
   And yellow streaked with brown.

   "That sonnet, Abate,
   Beautiful,
   I am quite exhausted by it.
   Your phrases turn about my heart
   And stifle me to swooning.
   Open the window, I beg.
   Lord!  What a strumming of fiddles and mandolins!
   'Tis really a shame to stop indoors.
   Call my maid, or I will make you lace me yourself.
   Fie, how hot it is, not a breath of air!
   See how straight the leaves are falling.
   Marianna, I will have the yellow satin caught up with silver fringe,
   It peeps out delightfully from under a mantle.
   Am I well painted to-day, 'caro Abate mio'?
   You will be proud of me at the 'Ridotto', hey?
   Proud of being 'Cavalier Servente' to such a lady?"
   "Can you doubt it, 'Bellissima Contessa'?
   A pinch more rouge on the right cheek,
   And Venus herself shines less..."
   "You bore me, Abate,
   I vow I must change you!
   A letter, Achmet?
   Run and look out of the window, Abate.
   I will read my letter in peace."
   The little slave with the yellow satin turban
   Gazes at his mistress with strained eyes.
   His yellow turban and skin
   Are gorgeous--barbaric.
   The yellow satin dress with its silver flashings
   Lies on a chair
   Beside a mantle and a mask.
   Yellow and,
   Gorgeous--barbaric.
   The lady reads her letter,
   And the leaves drift slowly
   Past the long windows.
   "How silly you look, my dear Abate,
   With that great brown leaf in your wig.
   Pluck it off, I beg you,
   Or I shall die of laughing."

   A yellow wall
   Aflare in the sunlight,
   Chequered with shadows,
   Shadows of vine leaves,
   Shadows of masks.
   Masks coming, printing themselves for an instant,
   Then passing on,
   More masks always replacing them.
   Masks with tricorns and rapiers sticking out behind
   Pursuing masks with plumes and high heels,
   The sunlight shining under their insteps.
   One,
   One, two,
   One, two, three,
   There is a thronging of shadows on the hot wall,
   Filigreed at the top with moving leaves.
   Yellow sunlight and shadows,
   Yellow and,
   Gorgeous--barbaric.
   Two masks stand together,
   And the shadow of a leaf falls through them,
   Marking the wall where they are not.
   From hat-tip to shoulder-tip,
   From elbow to sword-hilt,
   The leaf falls.
   The shadows mingle,
   Blur together,
   Slide along the wall and disappear.
   Gold of mosaics and candles,
   And nightness lurking in the ceiling beams.
   Saint Mark's glitters with flames and reflections.
   A cloak brushes aside,
   And the yellow of satin
   Licks out over the coloured inlays of the pavement.
   Under the gold crucifixes
   There is a meeting of hands
   Reaching from mantles.
   Sighing embraces, bold investigations,
   Hide in confessionals,
   Sheltered by the shuffling of feet.
   Gorgeous--barbaric
   In its mail of jewels and gold,
   Saint Mark's looks down at the swarm of masks;
   And outside in the palace gardens brown leaves fall,
   Flutter,
   Fall.
   Brown,
   And yellow streaked with brown.

   Blue, the sky over Venice,
   With a pricking of yellow stars.
   There is no moon,
   And the waves push darkly against the prow
   Of the gondola,
   Coming from Malamocco
   And streaming toward Venice.
   It is under the gondola hood,
   But the yellow of a satin dress
   Glares out like the eye of a watching tiger.
   Yellow compassed about with darkness,
   Yellow and,
   Gorgeous--barbaric.
   The boatman sings,
   It is Tasso that he sings;
   The lovers seek each other beneath their mantles,
   And the gondola drifts over the lagoon, aslant to the coming dawn.
   But at Malamocco in front,
   In Venice behind,
   Fall the leaves,
   Brown,
   And yellow streaked with brown.
   They fall,
   Flutter,
   Fall.





BRONZE TABLETS




The Fruit Shop



   Cross-ribboned shoes; a muslin gown,
   High-waisted, girdled with bright blue;
   A straw poke bonnet which hid the frown
   She pluckered her little brows into
   As she picked her dainty passage through
   The dusty street.  "Ah, Mademoiselle,
   A dirty pathway, we need rain,
   My poor fruits suffer, and the shell
   Of this nut's too big for its kernel, lain
   Here in the sun it has shrunk again.
   The baker down at the corner says
   We need a battle to shake the clouds;
   But I am a man of peace, my ways
   Don't look to the killing of men in crowds.
   Poor fellows with guns and bayonets for shrouds!
   Pray, Mademoiselle, come out of the sun.
   Let me dust off that wicker chair.  It's cool
   In here, for the green leaves I have run
   In a curtain over the door, make a pool
   Of shade.  You see the pears on that stool--
   The shadow keeps them plump and fair."
   Over the fruiterer's door, the leaves
   Held back the sun, a greenish flare
   Quivered and sparked the shop, the sheaves
   Of sunbeams, glanced from the sign on the eaves,
   Shot from the golden letters, broke
   And splintered to little scattered lights.
   Jeanne Tourmont entered the shop, her poke
   Bonnet tilted itself to rights,
   And her face looked out like the moon on nights
   Of flickering clouds.  "Monsieur Popain, I
   Want gooseberries, an apple or two,
   Or excellent plums, but not if they're high;
   Haven't you some which a strong wind blew?
   I've only a couple of francs for you."
   Monsieur Popain shrugged and rubbed his hands.
   What could he do, the times were sad.
   A couple of francs and such demands!
   And asking for fruits a little bad.
   Wind-blown indeed!  He never had
   Anything else than the very best.
   He pointed to baskets of blunted pears
   With the thin skin tight like a bursting vest,
   All yellow, and red, and brown, in smears.
   Monsieur Popain's voice denoted tears.
   He took up a pear with tender care,
   And pressed it with his hardened thumb.
   "Smell it, Mademoiselle, the perfume there
   Is like lavender, and sweet thoughts come
   Only from having a dish at home.
   And those grapes!  They melt in the mouth like wine,
   Just a click of the tongue, and they burst to honey.
   They're only this morning off the vine,
   And I paid for them down in silver money.
   The Corporal's widow is witness, her pony
   Brought them in at sunrise to-day.
   Those oranges--Gold!  They're almost red.
   They seem little chips just broken away
   From the sun itself.  Or perhaps instead
   You'd like a pomegranate, they're rarely gay,
   When you split them the seeds are like crimson spray.
   Yes, they're high, they're high, and those Turkey figs,
   They all come from the South, and Nelson's ships
   Make it a little hard for our rigs.
   They must be forever giving the slips
   To the cursed English, and when men clips
   Through powder to bring them, why dainties mounts
   A bit in price.  Those almonds now,
   I'll strip off that husk, when one discounts
   A life or two in a nigger row
   With the man who grew them, it does seem how
   They would come dear; and then the fight
   At sea perhaps, our boats have heels
   And mostly they sail along at night,
   But once in a way they're caught; one feels
   Ivory's not better nor finer--why peels
   From an almond kernel are worth two sous.
   It's hard to sell them now," he sighed.
   "Purses are tight, but I shall not lose.
   There's plenty of cheaper things to choose."
   He picked some currants out of a wide
   Earthen bowl.  "They make the tongue
   Almost fly out to suck them, bride
   Currants they are, they were planted long
   Ago for some new Marquise, among
   Other great beauties, before the Chateau
   Was left to rot.  Now the Gardener's wife,
   He that marched off to his death at Marengo,
   Sells them to me; she keeps her life
   From snuffing out, with her pruning knife.
   She's a poor old thing, but she learnt the trade
   When her man was young, and the young Marquis
   Couldn't have enough garden.  The flowers he made
   All new!  And the fruits!  But 'twas said that he
   Was no friend to the people, and so they laid
   Some charge against him, a cavalcade
   Of citizens took him away; they meant
   Well, but I think there was some mistake.
   He just pottered round in his garden, bent
   On growing things; we were so awake
   In those days for the New Republic's sake.
   He's gone, and the garden is all that's left
   Not in ruin, but the currants and apricots,
   And peaches, furred and sweet, with a cleft
   Full of morning dew, in those green-glazed pots,
   Why, Mademoiselle, there is never an eft
   Or worm among them, and as for theft,
   How the old woman keeps them I cannot say,
   But they're finer than any grown this way."
   Jeanne Tourmont drew back the filigree ring
   Of her striped silk purse, tipped it upside down
   And shook it, two coins fell with a ding
   Of striking silver, beneath her gown
   One rolled, the other lay, a thing
   Sparked white and sharply glistening,
   In a drop of sunlight between two shades.
   She jerked the purse, took its empty ends
   And crumpled them toward the centre braids.
   The whole collapsed to a mass of blends
   Of colours and stripes.  "Monsieur Popain, friends
   We have always been.  In the days before
   The Great Revolution my aunt was kind
   When you needed help.  You need no more;
   'Tis we now who must beg at your door,
   And will you refuse?"  The little man
   Bustled, denied, his heart was good,
   But times were hard.  He went to a pan
   And poured upon the counter a flood
   Of pungent raspberries, tanged like wood.
   He took a melon with rough green rind
   And rubbed it well with his apron tip.
   Then he hunted over the shop to find
   Some walnuts cracking at the lip,
   And added to these a barberry slip
   Whose acrid, oval berries hung
   Like fringe and trembled.  He reached a round
   Basket, with handles, from where it swung
   Against the wall, laid it on the ground
   And filled it, then he searched and found
   The francs Jeanne Tourmont had let fall.
   "You'll return the basket, Mademoiselle?"
   She smiled, "The next time that I call,
   Monsieur.  You know that very well."
   'Twas lightly said, but meant to tell.
   Monsieur Popain bowed, somewhat abashed.
   She took her basket and stepped out.
   The sunlight was so bright it flashed
   Her eyes to blindness, and the rout
   Of the little street was all about.
   Through glare and noise she stumbled, dazed.
   The heavy basket was a care.
   She heard a shout and almost grazed
   The panels of a chaise and pair.
   The postboy yelled, and an amazed
   Face from the carriage window gazed.
   She jumped back just in time, her heart
   Beating with fear.  Through whirling light
   The chaise departed, but her smart
   Was keen and bitter.  In the white
   Dust of the street she saw a bright
   Streak of colours, wet and gay,
   Red like blood.  Crushed but fair,
   Her fruit stained the cobbles of the way.
   Monsieur Popain joined her there.
   "Tiens, Mademoiselle,
         c'est le General Bonaparte, partant pour la Guerre!"




Malmaison



I

How the slates of the roof sparkle in the sun, over there, over there,
beyond the high wall!  How quietly the Seine runs in loops and windings,
over there, over there, sliding through the green countryside!  Like
ships of the line, stately with canvas, the tall clouds pass along the
sky, over the glittering roof, over the trees, over the looped and
curving river. A breeze quivers through the linden-trees.  Roses bloom
at Malmaison. Roses!  Roses!  But the road is dusty.  Already the
Citoyenne Beauharnais wearies of her walk.  Her skin is chalked and
powdered with dust, she smells dust, and behind the wall are roses!
Roses with smooth open petals, poised above rippling leaves...  Roses
... They have told her so.  The Citoyenne Beauharnais shrugs her
shoulders and makes a little face.  She must mend her pace if she would
be back in time for dinner.  Roses indeed!  The guillotine more likely.


The tiered clouds float over Malmaison, and the slate roof sparkles in
the sun.


II

Gallop!  Gallop!  The General brooks no delay.  Make way, good people,
and scatter out of his path, you, and your hens, and your dogs, and your
children.  The General is returned from Egypt, and is come in a
'caleche' and four to visit his new property.  Throw open the gates,
you, Porter of Malmaison.  Pull off your cap, my man, this is your
master, the husband of Madame.  Faster!  Faster!  A jerk and a jingle
and they are arrived, he and she.  Madame has red eyes.  Fie!  It is for
joy at her husband's return.  Learn your place, Porter.  A gentleman
here for two months?  Fie!  Fie, then!  Since when have you taken to
gossiping. Madame may have a brother, I suppose.  That--all green, and
red, and glitter, with flesh as dark as ebony--that is a slave; a
bloodthirsty, stabbing, slashing heathen, come from the hot countries to
cure your tongue of idle whispering.


A fine afternoon it is, with tall bright clouds sailing over the trees.


"Bonaparte, mon ami, the trees are golden like my star, the star I
pinned to your destiny when I married you.  The gypsy, you remember her
prophecy! My dear friend, not here, the servants are watching; send them
away, and that flashing splendour, Roustan.  Superb--Imperial, but..
. My dear, your arm is trembling; I faint to feel it touching me!  No,
no, Bonaparte, not that--spare me that--did we not bury that last
night! You hurt me, my friend, you are so hot and strong.  Not long,
Dear, no, thank God, not long."

The looped river runs saffron, for the sun is setting.  It is getting
dark. Dark.  Darker.  In the moonlight, the slate roof shines palely
milkily white.

The roses have faded at Malmaison, nipped by the frost.  What need for
roses? Smooth, open petals--her arms.  Fragrant, outcurved
petals--her breasts. He rises like a sun above her, stooping to touch
the petals, press them wider. Eagles.  Bees.  What are they to open
roses! A little shivering breeze runs through the linden-trees, and the
tiered clouds blow across the sky like ships of the line, stately with
canvas.


III

The gates stand wide at Malmaison, stand wide all day.  The gravel of
the avenue glints under the continual rolling of wheels. An officer
gallops up with his sabre clicking; a mameluke gallops down with his
charger kicking.  'Valets de pied' run about in ones, and twos, and
groups, like swirled blown leaves.  Tramp!  Tramp!  The guard is
changing, and the grenadiers off duty lounge out of sight, ranging along
the roads toward Paris.

The slate roof sparkles in the sun, but it sparkles milkily, vaguely,
the great glass-houses put out its shining.  Glass, stone, and onyx now
for the sun's mirror.  Much has come to pass at Malmaison. New rocks and
fountains, blocks of carven marble, fluted pillars uprearing antique
temples, vases and urns in unexpected places, bridges of stone, bridges
of wood, arbours and statues, and a flood of flowers everywhere, new
flowers, rare flowers, parterre after parterre of flowers.  Indeed, the
roses bloom at Malmaison.  It is youth, youth untrammeled and advancing,
trundling a country ahead of it as though it were a hoop.  Laughter, and
spur janglings in tessellated vestibules.  Tripping of clocked and
embroidered stockings in little low-heeled shoes over smooth
grass-plots. India muslins spangled with silver patterns slide
through trees--mingle--separate--white day fireflies flashing
moon-brilliance in the shade of foliage.

"The kangaroos!  I vow, Captain, I must see the kangaroos."

"As you please, dear Lady, but I recommend the shady linden alley and
feeding the cockatoos."

"They say that Madame Bonaparte's breed of sheep is the best in all
France."

"And, oh, have you seen the enchanting little cedar she planted when the
First Consul sent home the news of the victory of Marengo?"

Picking, choosing, the chattering company flits to and fro.  Over the
trees the great clouds go, tiered, stately, like ships of the line
bright with canvas.

Prisoners'-base, and its swooping, veering, racing, giggling, bumping.
The First Consul runs plump into M. de Beauharnais and falls. But he
picks himself up smartly, and starts after M. Isabey.  Too late, M. Le
Premier Consul, Mademoiselle Hortense is out after you.  Quickly, my
dear Sir!  Stir your short legs, she is swift and eager, and as graceful
as her mother.  She is there, that other, playing too, but lightly,
warily, bearing herself with care, rather floating out upon the air than
running, never far from goal.  She is there, borne up above her guests
as something indefinably fair, a rose above periwinkles.  A blown rose,
smooth as satin, reflexed, one loosened petal hanging back and down. A
rose that undulates languorously as the breeze takes it, resting upon
its leaves in a faintness of perfume.


There are rumours about the First Consul.  Malmaison is full of women,
and Paris is only two leagues distant.  Madame Bonaparte stands on the
wooden bridge at sunset, and watches a swan pushing the pink and
silver water in front of him as he swims, crinkling its smoothness into
pleats of changing colour with his breast. Madame Bonaparte presses
against the parapet of the bridge, and the crushed roses at her belt
melt, petal by petal, into the pink water.

SEA ROSE


    Rose, harsh rose,
    marred and with stint of petals,
    meagre flower, thin,
    sparse of leaf,

    more precious
    than a wet rose
    single on a stem--
    you are caught in the drift.

    Stunted, with small leaf,
    you are flung on the sand,
    you are lifted
    in the crisp sand
    that drives in the wind.

    Can the spice-rose
    drip such acrid fragrance
    hardened in a leaf?




THE HELMSMAN


    O be swift--
    we have always known you wanted us.

    We fled inland with our flocks,
    we pastured them in hollows,
    cut off from the wind
    and the salt track of the marsh.

    We worshipped inland--
    we stepped past wood-flowers,
    we forgot your tang,
    we brushed wood-grass.

    We wandered from pine-hills
    through oak and scrub-oak tangles,
    we broke hyssop and bramble,
    we caught flower and new bramble-fruit
    in our hair: we laughed
    as each branch whipped back,
    we tore our feet in half buried rocks
    and knotted roots and acorn-cups.

    We forgot--we worshipped,
    we parted green from green,
    we sought further thickets,
    we dipped our ankles
    through leaf-mould and earth,
    and wood and wood-bank enchanted us--

    and the feel of the clefts in the bark,
    and the slope between tree and tree--
    and a slender path strung field to field
    and wood to wood
    and hill to hill
    and the forest after it.

    We forgot--for a moment
    tree-resin, tree-bark,
    sweat of a torn branch
    were sweet to the taste.

    We were enchanted with the fields,
    the tufts of coarse grass
    in the shorter grass--
    we loved all this.

    But now, our boat climbs--hesitates--drops--
    climbs--hesitates--crawls back--
    climbs--hesitates--
    O be swift--
    we have always known you wanted us.




THE SHRINE

("SHE WATCHES OVER THE SEA")


    I

    Are your rocks shelter for ships--
    have you sent galleys from your beach,
    are you graded--a safe crescent--
    where the tide lifts them back to port--
    are you full and sweet,
    tempting the quiet
    to depart in their trading ships?

    Nay, you are great, fierce, evil--
    you are the land-blight--
    you have tempted men
    but they perished on your cliffs.

    Your lights are but dank shoals,
    slate and pebble and wet shells
    and seaweed fastened to the rocks.

    It was evil--evil
    when they found you,
    when the quiet men looked at you--
    they sought a headland
    shaded with ledge of cliff
    from the wind-blast.

    But you--you are unsheltered,
    cut with the weight of wind--
    you shudder when it strikes,
    then lift, swelled with the blast--
    you sink as the tide sinks,
    you shrill under hail, and sound
    thunder when thunder sounds.
    You are useless--
    when the tides swirl
    your boulders cut and wreck
    the staggering ships.


    II

    You are useless,
    O grave, O beautiful,
    the landsmen tell it--I have heard--
    you are useless.

    And the wind sounds with this
    and the sea
    where rollers shot with blue
    cut under deeper blue.

    O but stay tender, enchanted
    where wave-lengths cut you
    apart from all the rest--
    for we have found you,
    we watch the splendour of you,
    we thread throat on throat of freesia
    for your shelf.

    You are not forgot,
    O plunder of lilies,
    honey is not more sweet
    than the salt stretch of your beach.


    III

    Stay--stay--
    but terror has caught us now,
    we passed the men in ships,
    we dared deeper than the fisher-folk
    and you strike us with terror
    O bright shaft.

    Flame passes under us
    and sparks that unknot the flesh,
    sorrow, splitting bone from bone,
    splendour athwart our eyes
    and rifts in the splendour,
    sparks and scattered light.

    Many warned of this,
    men said:
    there are wrecks on the fore-beach,
    wind will beat your ship,
    there is no shelter in that headland,
    it is useless waste, that edge,
    that front of rock--
    sea-gulls clang beyond the breakers,
    none venture to that spot.


    IV

    But hail--
    as the tide slackens,
    as the wind beats out,
    we hail this shore--
    we sing to you,
    spirit between the headlands
    and the further rocks.

    Though oak-beams split,
    though boats and sea-men flounder,
    and the strait grind sand with sand
    and cut boulders to sand and drift--

    your eyes have pardoned our faults,
    your hands have touched us--
    you have leaned forward a little
    and the waves can never thrust us back
    from the splendour of your ragged coast.




MID-DAY


    The light beats upon me.
    I am startled--
    a split leaf crackles on the paved floor--
    I am anguished--defeated.

    A slight wind shakes the seed-pods--
    my thoughts are spent
    as the seeds.
    My thoughts tear me,
    I dread their fever.
    I am scattered in its whirl.
    I am scattered like
    the hot shrivelled seeds.

    The shrivelled seeds
    are spilt on the path--
    the grass bends with dust,
    the grape slips
    under its crackled leaf:
    yet far beyond the spent seed-pods,
    and theened stalks of mint,
    the poplar is bright on the hill,
    the poplar spreads out,
    deep-rooted among trees.

    O poplar, you are great
    among the hill-stones,
    while I perish on the path
    among the crevices of the rocks.




PURSUIT


    What do I care
    that the stream is trampled,
    the sand on the stream-bank
    still holds the print of your foot:
    the heel is cut deep.
    I see another mark
    on the grass ridge of the bank--
    it points toward the wood-path.
    I have lost the third
    in the packed earth.

    But here
    a wild-hyacinth stalk is snapped:
    the purple buds--half ripe--
    show deep purple
    where your heel pressed.

    A patch of flowering grass,
    low, trailing--
    you brushed this:
    the green stems show yellow-green
    where you lifted--turned the earth-side
    to the light:
    this and a dead leaf-spine,
    split across,
    show where you passed.

    You were swift, swift!
    here the forest ledge slopes--
    rain has furrowed the roots.
    Your hand caught at this;
    the root snapped under your weight.

    I can almost follow the note
    where it touched this slender tree
    and the next answered--
    and the next.

    And you climbed yet further!
    you stopped by the dwarf-cornel--
    whirled on your heels,
    doubled on your track.

    This is clear--
    you fell on the downward slope,
    you dragged a bruised thigh--you limped--
    you clutched this larch.

    Did your head, bent back,
    search further--
    clear through the green leaf-moss
    of the larch branches?

    Did you clutch,
    stammer with short breath and gasp:
    wood-daemons grant life--
    give life--I am almost lost.

    For some wood-daemon
    has lightened your steps.
    I can find no trace of you
    in the larch-cones and the underbrush.




THE CONTEST



    I

    Your stature is modelled
    with straight tool-edge:
    you are chiselled like rocks
    that are eaten into by the sea.

    With the turn and grasp of your wrist
    and the chords' stretch,
    there is a glint like worn brass.

    The ridge of your breast is taut,
    and under each the shadow is sharp,
    and between the clenched muscles
    of your slender hips.

    From the circle of your cropped hair
    there is light,
    and about your male torse
    and the foot-arch and the straight ankle.


    II

    You stand rigid and mighty--
    granite and the ore in rocks;
    a great band clasps your forehead
    and its heavy twists of gold.

    You are white--a limb of cypress
    bent under a weight of snow.

    You are splendid,
    your arms are fire;
    you have entered the hill-straits--
    a sea treads upon the hill-slopes.


    III

    Myrtle is about your head,
    you have bent and caught the spray:
    each leaf is sharp
    against the lift and furrow
    of your bound hair.

    The narcissus has copied the arch
    of your slight breast:
    your feet are citron-flowers,
    your knees, cut from white-ash,
    your thighs are rock-cistus.

    Your chin lifts straight
    from the hollow of your curved throat.
    Your shoulders are level--
    they have melted rare silver
    for their breadth.




SEA LILY


    Reed,
    slashed and torn
    but doubly rich--
    such great heads as yours
    drift upon temple-steps,
    but you are shattered
    in the wind.

    Myrtle-bark
    is flecked from you,
    scales are dashed
    from your stem,
    sand cuts your petal,
    furrows it with hard edge,
    like flint
    on a bright stone.

    Yet though the whole wind
    slash at your bark,
    you are lifted up,
    aye--though it hiss
    to cover you with froth.




THE WIND SLEEPERS


    Whiter
    than the crust
    left by the tide,
    we are stung by the hurled sand
    and the broken shells.

    We no longer sleep
    in the wind--
    we awoke and fled
    through the city gate.

    Tear--
    tear us an altar,
    tug at the cliff-boulders,
    pile them with the rough stones--
    we no longer
    sleep in the wind,
    propitiate us.

    Chant in a wail
    that never halts,
    pace a circle and pay tribute
    with a song.

    When the roar of a dropped wave
    breaks into it,
    pour meted words
    of sea-hawks and gulls
    and sea-birds that cry
    discords.




THE GIFT


    Instead of pearls--a wrought clasp--
    a bracelet--will you accept this?

    You know the script--
    you will start, wonder:
    what is left, what phrase
    after last night? This:

    The world is yet unspoiled for you,
    you wait, expectant--
    you are like the children
    who haunt your own steps
    for chance bits--a comb
    that may have slipped,
    a gold tassel, unravelled,
    plucked from your scarf,
    twirled by your slight fingers
    into the street--
    a flower dropped.

    Do not think me unaware,
    I who have snatched at you
    as the street-child clutched
    at the seed-pearls you spilt
    that hot day
    when your necklace snapped.

    Do not dream that I speak
    as one defrauded of delight,
    sick, shaken by each heart-beat
    or paralyzed, stretched at length,
    who gasps:
    these ripe pears
    are bitter to the taste,
    this spiced wine, poison, corrupt.
    I cannot walk--
    who would walk?
    Life is a scavenger's pit--I escape--
    I only, rejecting it,
    lying here on this couch.

    Your garden sloped to the beach,
    myrtle overran the paths,
    honey and amber flecked each leaf,
    the citron-lily head--
    one among many--
    weighed there, over-sweet.

    The myrrh-hyacinth
    spread across low slopes,
    violets streaked ridges
    through the grass.

    The house, too, was like this,
    over painted, over lovely--
    the world is like this.

    Sleepless nights,
    I remember the initiates,
    their gesture, their calm glance.
    I have heard how in rapt thought,
    in vision, they speak
    with another race,
    more beautiful, more intense than this.
    I could laugh--
    more beautiful, more intense?

    Perhaps that other life
    is contrast always to this.
    I reason:
    I have lived as they
    in their inmost rites--
    they endure the tense nerves
    through the moment of ritual.
    I endure from moment to moment--
    days pass all alike,
    tortured, intense.

    This I forgot last night:
    you must not be blamed,
    it is not your fault;
    as a child, a flower--any flower
    tore my breast--
    meadow-chicory, a common grass-tip,
    a leaf shadow, a flower tint
    unexpected on a winter-branch.

    I reason:
    another life holds what this lacks,
    a sea, unmoving, quiet--
    not forcing our strength
    to rise to it, beat on beat--
    stretch of sand,
    no garden beyond, strangling
    with its myrrh-lilies--
    a hill, not set with violets
    but stones, stones, bare rocks,
    dwarf-trees, twisted, no beauty
    to distract--to crowd
    madness upon madness.

    Only a still place
    and perhaps some outer horror
    some hideousness to stamp beauty,
    a mark--no changing it now--
    on our hearts.

    I send no string of pearls,
    no bracelet--accept this.




EVENING


    The light passes
    from ridge to ridge,
    from flower to flower--
    the hypaticas, wide-spread
    under the light
    grow faint--
    the petals reach inward,
    the blue tips bend
    toward the bluer heart
    and the flowers are lost.

    The cornel-buds are still white,
    but shadows dart
    from the cornel-roots--
    creeps from root to root,
    each leaf
    cuts another leaf on the grass,
    shadow seeks shadow,
    then both leaf
    and leaf-shadow are lost.




SHELTERED GARDEN


    I have had enough.
    I gasp for breath.

    Every way ends, every road,
    every foot-path leads at last
    to the hill-crest--
    then you retrace your steps,
    or find the same slope on the other side,
    precipitate.

    I have had enough--
    border-pinks, clove-pinks, wax-lilies,
    herbs, sweet-cress.

    O for some sharp swish of a branch--
    there is no scent of resin
    in this place,
    no taste of bark, of coarse weeds,
    aromatic, astringent--
    only border on border of scented pinks.

    Have you seen fruit under cover
    that wanted light--
    pears wadded in cloth,
    protected from the frost,
    melons, almost ripe,
    smothered in straw?

    Why not let the pears cling
    to the empty branch?
    All your coaxing will only make
    a bitter fruit--
    let them cling, ripen of themselves,
    test their own worth,
    nipped, shrivelled by the frost,
    to fall at last but fair
    with a russet coat.

    Or the melon--
    let it bleach yellow
    in the winter light,
    even tart to the taste--
    it is better to taste of frost--
    the exquisite frost--
    than of wadding and of dead grass.

    For this beauty,
    beauty without strength,
    chokes out life.
    I want wind to break,
    scatter these pink-stalks,
    snap off their spiced heads,
    fling them about with dead leaves--
    spread the paths with twigs,
    limbs broken off,
    trail great pine branches,
    hurled from some far wood
    right across the melon-patch,
    break pear and quince--
    leave half-trees, torn, twisted
    but showing the fight was valiant.

    O to blot out this garden
    to forget, to find a new beauty
    in some terrible
    wind-tortured place.




SEA POPPIES


    Amber husk
    fluted with gold,
    fruit on the sand
    marked with a rich grain,

    treasure
    spilled near the shrub-pines
    to bleach on the boulders:

    your stalk has caught root
    among wet pebbles
    and drift flung by the sea
    and grated shells
    and split conch-shells.

    Beautiful, wide-spread,
    fire upon leaf,
    what meadow yields
    so fragrant a leaf
    as your bright leaf?




LOSS


    The sea called--
    you faced the estuary,
    you were drowned as the tide passed.--
    I am glad of this--
    at least you have escaped.

    The heavy sea-mist stifles me.
    I choke with each breath--
    a curious peril, this--
    the gods have invented
    curious torture for us.

    One of us, pierced in the flank,
    dragged himself across the marsh,
    he tore at the bay-roots,
    lost hold on the crumbling bank--

    Another crawled--too late--
    for shelter under the cliffs.

    I am glad the tide swept you out,
    O beloved,
    you of all this ghastly host
    alone untouched,
    your white flesh covered with salt
    as with myrrh and burnt iris.

    We were hemmed in this place,
    so few of us, so few of us to fight
    their sure lances,
    the straight thrust--effortless
    with slight life of muscle and shoulder.

    So straight--only we were left,
    the four of us--somehow shut off.

    And the marsh dragged one back,
    and another perished under the cliff,
    and the tide swept you out.

    Your feet cut steel on the paths,
    I followed for the strength
    of life and grasp.
    I have seen beautiful feet
    but never beauty welded with strength.
    I marvelled at your height.

    You stood almost level
    with the lance-bearers
    and so slight.

    And I wondered as you clasped
    your shoulder-strap
    at the strength of your wrist
    and the turn of your young fingers,
    and the lift of your shorn locks,
    and the bronze
    of your sun-burnt neck.

    All of this,
    and the curious knee-cap,
    fitted above the wrought greaves,
    and the sharp muscles of your back
    which the tunic could not cover--
    the outline
    no garment could deface.

    I wonder if you knew how I watched,
    how I crowded before the spearsmen--
    but the gods wanted you,
    the gods wanted you back.




HUNTRESS


    Come, blunt your spear with us,
    our pace is hot
    and our bare heels
    in the heel-prints--
    we stand tense--do you see--
    are you already beaten
    by the chase?

    We lead the pace
    for the wind on the hills,
    the low hill is spattered
    with loose earth--
    our feet cut into the crust
    as with spears.

    We climbed the ploughed land,
    dragged the seed from the clefts,
    broke the clods with our heels,
    whirled with a parched cry
    into the woods:

    Can you come,
    can you come,
    can you follow the hound trail,
    can you trample the hot froth?

    Spring up--sway forward--
    follow the quickest one,
    aye, though you leave the trail
    and drop exhausted at our feet.




GARDEN


    I

    You are clear
    O rose, cut in rock,
    hard as the descent of hail.

    I could scrape the colour
    from the petals
    like spilt dye from a rock.

    If I could break you
    I could break a tree.

    If I could stir
    I could break a tree--
    I could break you.


    II

    O wind, rend open the heat,
    cut apart the heat,
    rend it to tatters.

    Fruit cannot drop
    through this thick air--
    fruit cannot fall into heat
    that presses up and blunts
    the points of pears
    and rounds the grapes.

    Cut the heat--
    plough through it,
    turning it on either side
    of your path.




SEA VIOLET


    The white violet
    is scented on its stalk,
    the sea-violet
    fragile as agate,
    lies fronting all the wind
    among the torn shells
    on the sand-bank.

    The greater blue violets
    flutter on the hill,
    but who would change for these
    who would change for these
    one root of the white sort?

    Violet
    your grasp is frail
    on the edge of the sand-hill,
    but you catch the light--
    frost, a star edges with its fire.




THE CLIFF TEMPLE


    I

    Great, bright portal,
    shelf of rock,
    rocks fitted in long ledges,
    rocks fitted to dark, to silver granite,
    to lighter rock--
    clean cut, white against white.

    High--high--and no hill-goat
    tramples--no mountain-sheep
    has set foot on your fine grass;
    you lift, you are the world-edge,
    pillar for the sky-arch.

    The world heaved--
    we are next to the sky:
    over us, sea-hawks shout,
    gulls sweep past--
    the terrible breakers are silent
    from this place.

    Below us, on the rock-edge,
    where earth is caught in the fissures
    of the jagged cliff,
    a small tree stiffens in the gale,
    it bends--but its white flowers
    are fragrant at this height.

    And under and under,
    the wind booms:
    it whistles, it thunders,
    it growls--it presses the grass
    beneath its great feet.


    II

    I said:
    for ever and for ever, must I follow you
    through the stones?
    I catch at you--you lurch:
    you are quicker than my hand-grasp.

    I wondered at you.
    I shouted--dear--mysterious--beautiful--
    white myrtle-flesh.

    I was splintered and torn:
    the hill-path mounted
    swifter than my feet.

    Could a daemon avenge this hurt,
    I would cry to him--could a ghost,
    I would shout--O evil,
    follow this god,
    taunt him with his evil and his vice.


    III

    Shall I hurl myself from here,
    shall I leap and be nearer you?
    Shall I drop, beloved, beloved,
    ankle against ankle?
    Would you pity me, O white breast?

    If I woke, would you pity me,
    would our eyes meet?

    Have you heard,
    do you know how I climbed this rock?
    My breath caught, I lurched forward--
    stumbled in the ground-myrtle.

    Have you heard, O god seated on the cliff,
    how far toward the ledges of your house,
    how far I had to walk?


    IV

    Over me the wind swirls.
    I have stood on your portal
    and I know--
    you are further than this,
    still further on another cliff.




ORCHARD


    I saw the first pear
    as it fell--
    the honey-seeking, golden-banded,
    the yellow swarm
    was not more fleet than I,
    (spare us from loveliness)
    and I fell prostrate
    crying:
    you have flayed us
    with your blossoms,
    spare us the beauty
    of fruit-trees.

    The honey-seeking
    paused not,
    the air thundered their song,
    and I alone was prostrate.

    O rough-hewn
    god of the orchard,
    I bring you an offering--
    do you, alone unbeautiful,
    son of the god,
    spare us from loveliness:

    these fallen hazel-nuts,
    stripped late of their green sheaths,
    grapes, red-purple,
    their berries
    dripping with wine,
    pomegranates already broken,
    and shrunken figs
    and quinces untouched,
    I bring you as offering.




SEA GODS


    I

    They say there is no hope--
    sand--drift--rocks--rubble of the sea--
    the broken hulk of a ship,
    hung with shreds of rope,
    pallid under the cracked pitch.

    They say there is no hope
    to conjure you--
    no whip of the tongue to anger you--
    no hate of words
    you must rise to refute.

    They say you are twisted by the sea,
    you are cut apart
    by wave-break upon wave-break,
    that you are misshapen by the sharp rocks,
    broken by the rasp and after-rasp.

    That you are cut, torn, mangled,
    torn by the stress and beat,
    no stronger than the strips of sand
    along your ragged beach.


    II

    But we bring violets,
    great masses--single, sweet,
    wood-violets, stream-violets,
    violets from a wet marsh.

    Violets in clumps from hills,
    tufts with earth at the roots,
    violets tugged from rocks,
    blue violets, moss, cliff, river-violets.

    Yellow violets' gold,
    burnt with a rare tint--
    violets like red ash
    among tufts of grass.

    We bring deep-purple
    bird-foot violets.

    We bring the hyacinth-violet,
    sweet, bare, chill to the touch--
    and violets whiter than the in-rush
    of your own white surf.


    III

    For you will come,
    you will yet haunt men in ships,
    you will trail across the fringe of strait
    and circle the jagged rocks.

    You will trail across the rocks
    and wash them with your salt,
    you will curl between sand-hills--
    you will thunder along the cliff--
    break--retreat--get fresh strength--
    gather and pour weight upon the beach.

    You will draw back,
    and the ripple on the sand-shelf
    will be witness of your track.
    O privet-white, you will paint
    the lintel of wet sand with froth.

    You will bring myrrh-bark
    and drift laurel-wood from hot coasts!
    when you hurl high--high--
    we will answer with a shout.

    For you will come,
    you will come,
    you will answer our taut hearts,
    you will break the lie of men's thoughts,
    and cherish and shelter us.




ACON


    I

    Bear me to Dictaeus,
    and to the steep slopes;
    to the river Erymanthus.

    I choose spray of dittany,
    cyperum, frail of flower,
    buds of myrrh,
    all-healing herbs,
    close pressed in calathes.

    For she lies panting,
    drawing sharp breath,
    broken with harsh sobs,
    she, Hyella,
    whom no god pities.


    II

    Dryads
    haunting the groves,
    nereids
    who dwell in wet caves,
    for all the white leaves of olive-branch,
    and early roses,
    and ivy wreaths, woven gold berries,
    which she once brought to your altars,
    bear now ripe fruits from Arcadia,
    and Assyrian wine
    to shatter her fever.

    The light of her face falls from its flower,
    as a hyacinth,
    hidden in a far valley,
    perishes upon burnt grass.

    Pales,
    bring gifts,
    bring your Phoenician stuffs,
    and do you, fleet-footed nymphs,
    bring offerings,
    Illyrian iris,
    and a branch of shrub,
    and frail-headed poppies.




NIGHT


    The night has cut
    each from each
    and curled the petals
    back from the stalk
    and under it in crisp rows;

    under at an unfaltering pace,
    under till the rinds break,
    back till each bent leaf
    is parted from its stalk;

    under at a grave pace,
    under till the leaves
    are bent back
    till they drop upon earth,
    back till they are all broken.

    O night,
    you take the petals
    of the roses in your hand,
    but leave the stark core
    of the rose
    to perish on the branch.




PRISONERS


    It is strange that I should want
    this sight of your face--
    we have had so much:
    at any moment now I may pass,
    stand near the gate,
    do not speak--
    only reach if you can, your face
    half-fronting the passage
    toward the light.

    Fate--God sends this as a mark,
    a last token that we are not forgot,
    lost in this turmoil,
    about to be crushed out,
    burned or stamped out
    at best with sudden death.

    The spearsman who brings this
    will ask for the gold clasp
    you wear under your coat.
    I gave all I had left.

    Press close to the portal,
    my gate will soon clang
    and your fellow wretches
    will crowd to the entrance--
    be first at the gate.

    Ah beloved, do not speak.
    I write this in great haste--
    do not speak,
    you may yet be released.
    I am glad enough to depart
    though I have never tasted life
    as in these last weeks.

    It is a strange life,
    patterned in fire and letters
    on the prison pavement.
    If I glance up
    it is written on the walls,
    it is cut on the floor,
    it is patterned across
    the slope of the roof.

    I am weak--weak--
    last night if the guard
    had left the gate unlocked
    I could not have ventured to escape,
    but one thought serves me now
    with strength.

    As I pass down the corridor
    past desperate faces at each cell,
    your eyes and my eyes may meet.

    You will be dark, unkempt,
    but I pray for one glimpse of your face--
    why do I want this?
    I who have seen you at the banquet
    each flower of your hyacinth-circlet
    white against your hair.

    Why do I want this,
    when even last night
    you startled me from sleep?
    You stood against the dark rock,
    you grasped an elder staff.

    So many nights
    you have distracted me from terror.
    Once you lifted a spear-flower.
    I remember how you stooped
    to gather it--
    and it flamed, the leaf and shoot
    and the threads, yellow, yellow--
    sheer till they burnt
    to red-purple in the cup.

    As I pass your cell-door
    do not speak.
    I was first on the list--
    They may forget you tried to shield me
    as the horsemen passed.




STORM


    You crash over the trees,
    you crack the live branch--
    the branch is white,
    the green crushed,
    each leaf is rent like split wood.

    You burden the trees
    with drops,
    you swirl and crash--
    you have broken off a weighted leaf
    in the wind,
    it is hurled out,
    whirls up and sinks,
    a green stone.




SEA IRIS


    I

    Weed, moss-weed,
    root tangled in sand,
    sea-iris, brittle flower,
    one petal like a shell
    is broken,
    and you print a shadow
    like a thin twig.

    Fortunate one,
    scented and stinging,
    rigid myrrh-bud,
    camphor-flower,
    sweet and salt--you are wind
    in our nostrils.


    II

    Do the murex-fishers
    drench you as they pass?
    Do your roots drag up colour
    from the sand?
    Have they slipped gold under you--
    rivets of gold?

    Band of iris-flowers
    above the waves,
    you are painted blue,
    painted like a fresh prow
    stained among the salt weeds.




HERMES OF THE WAYS


    The hard sand breaks,
    and the grains of it
    are clear as wine.

    Far off over the leagues of it,
    the wind,
    playing on the wide shore,
    piles little ridges,
    and the great waves
    break over it.

    But more than the many-foamed ways
    of the sea,
    I know him
    of the triple path-ways,
    Hermes,
    who awaits.

    Dubious,
    facing three ways,
    welcoming wayfarers,
    he whom the sea-orchard
    shelters from the west,
    from the east
    weathers sea-wind;
    fronts the great dunes.

    Wind rushes
    over the dunes,
    and the coarse, salt-crusted grass
    answers.

    Heu,
    it whips round my ankles!


    II

    Small is
    this white stream,
    flowing below ground
    from the poplar-shaded hill,
    but the water is sweet.

    Apples on the small trees
    are hard,
    too small,
    too late ripened
    by a desperate sun
    that struggles through sea-mist.

    The boughs of the trees
    are twisted
    by many bafflings;
    twisted are
    the small-leafed boughs.

    But the shadow of them
    is not the shadow of the mast head
    nor of the torn sails.

    Hermes, Hermes,
    the great sea foamed,
    gnashed its teeth about me;
    but you have waited,
    were sea-grass tangles with
    shore-grass.




PEAR TREE


    Silver dust
    lifted from the earth,
    higher than my arms reach,
    you have mounted,
    O silver,
    higher than my arms reach
    you front us with great mass;

    no flower ever opened
    so staunch a white leaf,
    no flower ever parted silver
    from such rare silver;

    O white pear,
    your flower-tufts
    thick on the branch
    bring summer and ripe fruits
    in their purple hearts.




CITIES


    Can we believe--by an effort
    comfort our hearts:
    it is not waste all this,
    not placed here in disgust,
    street after street,
    each patterned alike,
    no grace to lighten
    a single house of the hundred
    crowded into one garden-space.

    Crowded--can we believe,
    not in utter disgust,
    in ironical play--
    but the maker of cities grew faint
    with the beauty of temple
    and space before temple,
    arch upon perfect arch,
    of pillars and corridors that led out
    to strange court-yards and porches
    where sun-light stamped
    hyacinth-shadows
    on the pavement.

    That the maker of cities grew faint
    with the splendour of palaces,
    paused while the incense-flowers
    from the incense-trees
    dropped on the marble-walk,
    thought anew, fashioned this--
    street after street alike.

    For alas,
    he had crowded the city so full
    that men could not grasp beauty,
    beauty was over them,
    through them, about them,
    no crevice unpacked with the honey,
    rare, measureless.

    So he built a new city,
    ah can we believe, not ironically
    but for new splendour
    constructed new people
    to lift through slow growth
    to a beauty unrivalled yet--
    and created new cells,
    hideous first, hideous now--
    spread larve across them,
    not honey but seething life.

    And in these dark cells,
    packed street after street,
    souls live, hideous yet--
    O disfigured, defaced,
    with no trace of the beauty
    men once held so light.

    Can we think a few old cells
    were left--we are left--
    grains of honey,
    old dust of stray pollen
    dull on our torn wings,
    we are left to recall the old streets?

    Is our task the less sweet
    that the larve still sleep in their cells?
    Or crawl out to attack our frail strength:
    You are useless. We live.
    We await great events.
    We are spread through this earth.
    We protect our strong race.
    You are useless.
    Your cell takes the place
    of our young future strength.

    Though they sleep or wake to torment
    and wish to displace our old cells--
    thin rare gold--
    that their larve grow fat--
    is our task the less sweet?

    Though we wander about,
    find no honey of flowers in this waste,
    is our task the less sweet--
    who recall the old splendour,
    await the new beauty of cities?




    The city is peopled
    with spirits, not ghosts, O my love:

    Though they crowded between
    and usurped the kiss of my mouth
    their breath was your gift,
    their beauty, your life.


                    Poisonous Dwellers of the Desert


The late Dr. Forrest Shreve of the Desert Laboratory in Tucson, Arizona,
stated that the principal characteristic of a desert is “deficient and
uncertain rainfall.” From our grammar school geographies we gained the
impression that a desert is a great expanse of sand piled into dunes by
the wind, without moisture or vegetation, a land of thirst, desolation,
even death.

Although sand dunes devoid of vegetation are characteristic of the
Sahara and some other deserts of the world, those of the United States
support a variety of plant and animal life which, through generations of
adaptation, are able to meet the conditions imposed by this environment
(see frontispiece). Persons who misunderstand our deserts fear them,
while others who have visited them become fascinated and return
periodically or settle down and live in them.

Some of the creatures living in deserts are known to be poisonous to
man. Western thriller fiction of press, screen, and TV has emphasized
and exaggerated this fact, developing in many people a wholly mistaken
fear of the desert and its inhabitants. In contrast, other persons may
under-estimate the possibility of injury from these animals and become
careless.

It is the purpose of this booklet to discuss accurately the various
poisonous dwellers of the desert, as well as to debunk some of the
superstitions and misunderstandings which have developed.

A majority of the poisonous creatures in the desert are by no means
restricted to that environment. Rattlesnakes, for example, so often
associated with the arid regions of the West, occur in nearly every
section of the United States.

“A poison,” states Encyclopedia Brittanica, “is a substance which, by
its direct action on the mucous membrane, tissues, or skin, or after
absorption into the circulatory system can, in the way which it is
administered, injuriously affect health or destroy life.” A poisonous
creature may be defined as one which produces a poison for the
administering of which it has developed a special mechanism.

Since, due to personal differences, the bite or sting of a poisonous
creature may injuriously affect the health of one person and not that of
another, and since the poison of one individual creature may be
insufficient to cause an unpleasant reaction, while that from several
hundred might produce severe illness or even death, it is difficult to
determine which creature should be included in a publication of this
nature. The writer, therefore, has exercised his judgment in discussing
in the following pages such creatures as he feels may offer a menace to
the welfare of a visitor to the desert. In addition, a few paragraphs
are included for the defense of several harmless desert dwellers which
are mistakenly believed poisonous and which, as a result, have been
mercilessly persecuted.

    [Illustration: Giant desert centipede]

    [Illustration: Enlarged view of underside of centipede’s head,
    showing the double pair of jaws.
                                   (Photographs by Marvin H. Frost Sr.)]

It should be understood that the author has not himself conducted
scientific research among the desert animals regarding which he writes.
The material in this book is a digest of the findings of various
competent scientific and medical authorities, and has been carefully
checked for accuracy and authenticity.

Don’t be frightened as a result of reading this booklet. The desert is
just as safe—perhaps safer—for homemaking as many other parts of our
country.




                         Giant desert centipede
                         (Scolopendra heros)


Many species of centipedes of various sizes and colors are found
throughout the world. The majority are small, harmless, and not
sufficiently numerous to be considered seriously, even as pests.

Usually they are found under boards, in cracks and crevices, in
basements and closets, and in other moist locations where they hide
during the day and venture forth at night in search of small insects for
food.

The large, poisonous desert centipede attains a length of 6 or even 8
inches and has jaws of sufficient strength to inflict a painful bite.
Glands at the base of the jaw produce poison which causes the area about
the bite to swell and become feverish and painful. Persons who have been
bitten report that the swelling and tenderness may persist for several
weeks, that the bite sometimes suppurates and is difficult and slow to
heal.

Because the bite of even a large centipede is usually a painful
inconvenience rather than a serious injury, no specific treatment has
been developed. Application of an antiseptic such as iodine immediately
following receipt of the bite, working it well into the fang punctures,
is advised. Bathing the site of the bite with strong ammonia will bring
relief if done immediately, while soaking the area in a solution of hot
Epsom salts may shorten the period of discomfort. Prompt treatment by a
physician will reduce duration and intensity of pain.

Although the bite of a large centipede is no joke, it is not cause for
fear or worry. Exaggerated stories of the deadly effects of the bite,
and reports that the tip of each leg carries a poisonous spur, have
caused many persons to be overly afraid of centipedes. Hysteria and
shock resulting from this unfounded fear probably have been the cause of
more suffering than the bites themselves.

The tip of each of the 42 legs of the giant desert centipede is equipped
with a sharp claw. It is possible when the centipede scurries across a
person’s arm or leg for these claws to make pin-point punctures.
Infection introduced through these tiny openings readily leads to the
belief that poison has been injected. Prompt application of an
antiseptic will greatly reduce the possibility of infection.

    [Illustration: Left: Yellow, slender-tailed. Deadly species.
       Centruroides sculpturatus
    Center: Striped-tail. Not deadly.
       Vejovis spinigeris
    Right: Desert hairy. Large, not deadly.
       Hadrurus hirsutus]




                               Scorpions


More deaths have occurred in Arizona from scorpion sting than from the
bites and stings of all other creatures combined. It is apparent that
scorpions are dangerous, that all persons should be informed regarding
them, and that details of first-aid treatment should be common
knowledge.

In some parts of the South, scorpions are called “stinging lizards.”
This is unfortunate because it has caused many people to think of
lizards as poisonous and capable of stinging.

Not all scorpions are deadly. Danger from the two deadly species (one
shown above) which look so much alike that only an expert can tell them
apart, is greatest to children under 4 years of age. Unless prompt
action is taken small children might succumb to the poison from a single
sting from an individual of either of the deadly species. Older children
may die from the effect of several stings, and adults, especially those
in poor health, may suffer serious injuries.

Of the more than 20 species of scorpions recorded in Arizona where
detailed studies have been made, the two deadly forms have been found
only across the southern portion of the State and in the bottom of Grand
Canyon. As far as is now known, no other deadly species occur in the
Southwest, except in Mexico where there are several.

It is important, then, that all persons should recognize the deadly
species. Study the photograph. Note that the deadly species (left) is
about 2 inches in length, is straw colored, and that its entire body,
especially the joints of the legs, pincers, and “tail,” are long and
slender. It has a streamlined appearance. This is in contrast with the
stubby or chunky appearance of the many non-deadly species.

Scorpions sting, they do not bite. The pincers at the head end of the
body are for the purpose of holding the prey, which consists primarily
of soft-bodied insects, while the scorpion tears it to pieces with its
jaws.

The sting is located at the extremity of the “tail” and consists of a
very sharp, curved tip attached to a bulbous organ containing the
poison-secreting glands and poison reservoir. The sting is driven into
the flesh of the victim by means of a quick, spring-like flick of the
“tail.” Muscular pressure forces the poison into the wound through two
tiny openings very near the sting tip. Thus the poison is injected
beneath the skin, making treatment difficult, as the impervious skin
renders surface application ineffective.

Whereas the poison of non-deadly species of scorpions is local in
effect, causing swelling and discoloration of the tissues in immediate
proximity to the point of puncture, that of the deadly species is
general over the entire body of the victim. There is intense pain at the
site of the sting but very little inflammation or swelling.

    [Illustration: Giant desert hairy scorpion in alert position.]

According to Kent and Stahnke[1], “the victim soon becomes restless.
This increases to a degree that, in cases of small children, the patient
is entirely unable to cooperate with attendants. It turns, frets, and
does not remain quiet for an instant. The abdominal muscles may become
rigid, and there may be contractions of the arms and legs. Drooling of
saliva begins, and the heart rate increases. The temperature may reach
103 or 104 degrees. Cyanosis (skin turning blue) gradually appears, and
respiration becomes increasingly difficult, causing a reaction not
unlike that observed in a severe case of bronchial asthma. Involuntary
urination and defecation may occur. In fatal cases the above symptoms
may become so marked that apparently the child dies from exhaustion.

“In cases that recover, the acute symptoms subside in 12 hours or less.
In the adult, symptoms as enumerated may be encountered, but as a rule
they are less severe. Numbness is usually experienced at the site of the
sting. If one of the appendages is stung, the may become
temporarily useless. Two cases of temporary blindness have been
experienced. Some patients complain of malaise (discomfort) for many
days following the sting. One patient developed a tachycardia (rapid
heart) lasting two weeks.”


Treatment of scorpion stings

Dr. Stahnke recommends the following treatment for a person stung by one
of the deadly scorpions:

“First, apply a tight tourniquet near the point of puncture and between
it and the heart.... As soon as possible, place an ice pack on the site
of the sting. Have a pack of finely crushed ice wrapped in as thin a
cloth as possible. Cover and surround the area for about 10 to 12
inches. After the ice pack has been in place for approximately 5
minutes, remove the tourniquet.

“If a person is stung on the hand, foot, or other region that can be
submerged completely, place the portion, as soon as possible, in an
ice-and-water mixture made of small lumps of ice (about half the size of
ice cubes) in a proportion of half ice and half water. Treatment should
not be continued longer than 2 hours.

“NEVER put salt in the water. After the first 15 minutes, the hand or
foot must be removed for relief for 1 minute every 10 minutes in the
iced water.”

Dr. Stahnke continues: “If the patient is less than 3 years old, if the
patient has been stung several times, or if the patient has been stung
on the back of the neck, anywhere along the backbone, or on an area of
deep flesh like the buttock, thigh, or trunk of the body, or especially
on the genital organs, medical assistance should be obtained at once.”

Dr. F. A. Shannon advises that no person with disease involving the
circulation of the extremities should use iced water. Morphine is a
necessary tool in controlling pain, and barbiturates are useful for
control of convulsions.

Several hospitals in southern Arizona keep a supply of scorpion
antivenin and, in any case, the patient should be taken to a hospital as
quickly as possible. In all cases the first-aid treatment should be
applied and maintained until the patient is under the care of a
physician.

With adults, in case a physician is not available, the iced-water
treatment usually proves sufficient. Generally, after 2 hours of
iced-water use, there is no longer any danger, but should symptoms
reappear, treatment should be resumed.

Scorpion antivenin for stings of Centruroides sculpturatus and C.
gertschi is available at the Poisonous Animals Research Laboratory,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona. The recommended method of
treatment is the “L-C” method. The L stands for ligature and C for
cryotherapy (tourniquet and ice pack treatment).

Treatment is as follows: “As soon as possible (after the sting has been
received) inject intramuscularly or subcutaneously, 5 to 10 cc. of
natural serum or 3 cc. of the concentrated. In serious cases, inject
intravenously.” No immediate untoward results have been noted, but some
cases of skin irritation develop later.

In cases of scorpion poisoning when antivenin is not available, the
following treatment is recommended[12]:

“Use morphine with extreme caution. It has not been found effective in
the usual doses. Barbiturates are more effective and less dangerous.
Bromides in large doses are apparently of value. In those cases
characterized by severe pulmonary edema (accumulation of fluid in the
lungs) atropine is indicated along with general supportive measures.
Compresses, using a fairly concentrated ammonium hydroxide solution,
have been found helpful if applied within a few moments. If applied for
the first time about 10 minutes after the sting, no apparent benefit is
attained.”


Where scorpions live

Scorpions normally remain in hiding during the day, coming out in search
of insects at night. The deadly species are commonly found under bark on
old stumps, in lumber piles, or in firewood piled in dark corners. It is
not unusual to find them in basements or in linen closets. Adults may
find an unpleasant surprise in a shoe or a piece of clothing taken from
a closet or dresser drawer. Legs of cribs or children’s beds may be
placed in cans containing kerosene or in wide-mouthed jars.

Moral: Keep your garage, basement, and premises in general, clean, tidy,
and free from insects on which scorpions feed. Screen children’s cribs,
and pull the sheets clear back before putting the youngsters to bed.
Shake out your shoes before putting them on, and inspect sheets,
blankets, or clothing which have been in closets or drawers.




                           Black widow spider
                        (Lactrodectus mactans)


Although spiders in general produce venom with which to paralyze their
prey, only a very few have fangs of sufficient length or power to
penetrate human skin, or venom of sufficient quantity or potency to
affect human health.

There are two poisons present in spider venom: a toxin which cause local
symptoms, and a toxalbumin producing general symptoms. In those spiders
whose bites produce systematic disturbances it is believed that the
latter poison predominates.


Where widows live

Black widows spin their webs in crevices between rocks, under logs or
overhanging banks, in abandoned rodent holes, and in rock and wood
piles. Indoors they are most frequently encountered in dark corners of
garages, basements, and stables.

    [Illustration: Underside of widow spider showing
    characteristic red “hourglass” mark on the abdomen by which this
    species may be recognized.]

A favorite and especially dangerous location in which a widow
establishes her home is beneath the seat of a pit toilet. Such a
location is ideal for the spider because it is dark, is not usually
disturbed, and insects, especially flies, upon which the spiders feed,
are abundant. Humans using the toilet, unaware of the presence of the
spider, arouse her by breaking or agitating her web, and offer
especially tender and susceptible portions of their anatomies for her
bite.

Pit toilets in warm climates should always be built with hinged seats
which should be raised and inspected frequently. As a further
precaution, the underside of the seats should be treated with creosote,
an effective repellent.

Although the majority of people now recognize the widow, some do
not, hence they kill all dark-colored spiders on general principles.
This is neither necessary nor desirable.

The female widow is a medium-sized, glossy, solitary spider
with a globular abdomen spectacularly marked on the underside with a
bright red spot roughly the shape of an hourglass. The normal position
of the spider is hanging upside down in her web so that the “hourglass”
is plainly visible if she is below the level of the eye. Her overall
length is 1 to 1¼ inches.

The males are much smaller and, like the immature females, are grey in
color and variously striped and spotted.

Adult females spin egg cocoons during the warm season; each cocoon
contains approximately 300 to 500 eggs which hatch in about 30 days. As
many as nine broods per year have been recorded. The young grow fast but
do not mature until the following spring or summer.


Black widow bites

Although widows ferociously pounce upon insects or other spiders
much larger than themselves which become entangled in their webs, they
are by nature retiring and bite humans only when restrained from escape
by contact with the body of man.

The fangs, which are about one-fiftieth of an inch in length, serve to
inject from two large glands the venom which is reported to be much more
virulent per unit than that of the rattlesnake.

There is some pain and swelling at the site of the bite. The pain
spreads throughout the body, centering at the extremities, which become
cramped, and over the abdomen, where the muscles become rigid. There is
nausea and vomiting, difficulty in breathing, dizziness, ringing in the
ears, and headache. Blood pressure is raised, eye pupils are dilated and
the reflexes are overactive. Medical records, according to Bogen[2],
show that “despite its severe symptoms, arachnidism (poisoning by
spider, tick, or scorpion) is, in the majority of cases, a self-limiting
condition, and generally clears up spontaneously within a few days,”
although cases of death resulting from widow bites are on
record[3].


Treatment of widow bites

Since the venom of the widow, among other properties, appears to
affect the nervous system, its effect is almost instantaneous, and most
first-aid measures are of little value.

Stahnke has found that the iced-water treatment (as described in detail
in the scorpion section of this booklet) is beneficial. The points of
puncture should be treated with iodine, the patient kept as quiet as
possible, and an ice pack applied or the part submerged in iced-water,
and a physician summoned immediately.

Baerg[4] recommends hot baths—as hot as the patient can endure. These
should be used only in cases of advanced poisoning, never immediately
after the bite is received.

Internal use of alcohol is dangerous, and a person bitten when
intoxicated would have much less chance of recovery.

Professional treatment consists mostly in the use of opiates,
hydrotherapy, and similar measures to alleviate the acute pain. Of more
than 75 different remedies used, three seem to be outstanding as
palliatives: spinal puncture, intravenous injections of Epsom salts, and
intramuscular administration of convalescent serum when given within 8
hours. Dr. Charles Barton, of Los Angeles, recommends intramuscular or
intravenous injection of calcium gluconate, 10 cc. in a 10 per cent
solution. The patient should be encouraged to drink as much water as he
will. He usually leaves the hospital on the fourth day. Recent
experiments with an injection of neostigmine followed by one of atropine
have had encouraging results, and the use of ACTH in several cases has
had spectacular results, according to Readers’ Digest (Nov. 1951, p.
45).


Control of widows

Because of their wide distribution and secretive habits, widows
are difficult to control. Basements, outbuildings, and garages should be
cleaned frequently, and widow webs and eggs destroyed. If
accessible, the spider may be dislodged from her web with a broom, and
smashed. The use of a blowtorch, where there is no fire hazard, is
effective for both spiders and egg cocoons. Insect sprays, in general,
are ineffectual.




                          Brown recluse spider
                       and its venomous relatives


Until recently the widow was considered the only spider in the
United States dangerous to man. In 1955, physicians in Missouri and
Arkansas began treating persons suffering from the bite of the brown
recluse spider, whose poison caused serious damage to the skin at the
site of the puncture and often produced a severe systemic reaction
sometimes fatal to young children.

The spider is approximately ⁵/₁₆ inch in length, dark brown to fawn,
with long legs. A violin-shaped spot on the upper side of the
cephalothorax (head portion) is the only noticeable identification
giving rise to another common name—fiddleback spider. It is also known
as brown spider, or brown house spider.

Little has been published on its life history, but it has been reported
from Kansas, Illinois, the Gulf Coast, and from Tennessee to Oklahoma.
It is extending its territory westward and has recently been reported
from southeastern New Mexico and southern California. People are
contributing to the rapid geographical spread of this species by
unknowingly carrying it across state lines in their luggage. The brown
recluse spider, according to Paul N. Morgan, research microbiologist at
the Little Rock, Arkansas, Veterans Administration Hospital,
“constitutes a hazard to the health of man, perhaps greater than the
Black Widow.”

    [Illustration: Brown recluse spider
 (Photo—Division of Dermatology Dept. of Medicine U. of Arkansas Medical
                                                                Center)]


Where found

It is found in open fields and rocky bluffs but thrives particularly
well in outhouses, garages, dark closets, storerooms, and in piles of
sacking or old clothing. Its web is large and irregular.


The brown recluse bite

Because of the spider’s nocturnal and retiring habits few people are
bitten, in spite of a large spider population. According to an article
in the August, 1963 Journal of the Arkansas Medical Society, “there may
be mild transitory stinging at the time of the bite, but there is little
associated early pain. The patient may be completely unaware he has been
bitten, and the spider is seldom seen. Only after 2 to 8 hours does
pain, varying from mild to severe, begin. After several days an ulcer
may form at the site of the bite. The venom appears to contain a
spreading factor resulting in a spread of the necrosis or tissue
destruction. In some instances, the ulcer may be so large that skin
grafting is required, but the graft may take poorly or not at all. “The
bite may also produce serious systemic symptoms including fever, chills,
weakness, vomiting, joint pain, and a spotty skin eruption, all
occurring within 24-48 hours after the venom injection.”


Treatment for bite of the brown recluse spider

Physicians at the University of Arkansas Medical Center, Little Rock,
prefer the prompt administration of corticosteroids, stating, “Large
doses given early may completely prevent the gangrenous response as well
as the systemic reaction. The dosage schedule which we have found most
effective is: 80 mg. of methylprednisolone (Deep-Medrol) intramuscularly
immediately followed by one or two additional doses of same amount at
24-48 hour intervals. Subsequently, step wise decrease to 40, 20, 10
mg., every 24-48 hours, depending on the patient’s response, is carried
out.”

Dr. Herbert L Stahnke, Director of the Arizona Poisonous Animals
Research Laboratory, reports that an antivenin has been prepared in
South America to control both the local and general symptoms from the
bite of a closely related species of Loxosceles. He states, “locally
there seems to be a favorable response to hydroxyzine, 100 mg. four
times a day. I would say that cryotherapy, as we recommend it, would
prevent all symptoms. I would recommend that the site of the bite be
packed in crushed ice for 6 to 8 hours, after which the patient should
be kept warm to the point of perspiration with the ice pack continuing
for a total of 24 hours. In other words, treated like a pit viper bite,
but over a much shorter period of time.” Avoid narcotics (morphine,
demerol, dilaudid, codeine, etc.) since they enhance the systemic
effects.

Although the brown recluse has not yet been reported in Arizona, it may
be expected at any time, according to Dr. Mont A. Cazier, professor of
zoology at Arizona State University at Tempe. In the meantime, studies
are being made of the several close relatives of Loxosceles reclusa
known to be present in the state. Among these is L. unicolor, first
collected near Littlefield and Virgin Narrows in 1932. Equally poisonous
with reclusa is the similar L. laeta, also found in Arizona. Other
members of the genus, L. deserta and L. arizonica, have been known
to live in Arizona and elsewhere in the Southwest for more than three
decades, but no studies have been made of their venom. Dr. Willis J.
Gertsch, world famous authority on spiders, believes that there may be
as many as 20 species of Loxosceles in the Southwest. Several reports
by persons who have been bitten by spiders describe reactions similar to
those caused by the bite of the brown recluse.

According to Dr. Findley E. Russell, toxicology researcher of the
University of Southern California Medical School, the “venom” injected
by the brown spider is not really a toxin but a complete chemical that
inhibits the normal action of infection-fighting antibodies in the human
anatomy.




                               Tarantulas
                           (Avicularia sp.)


Known to naturalists as bird spiders, the large hairy members of the
genera Avicularia, Dugesiella, and Aphonopelma of the arid
Southwest are commonly called tarantulas.

    [Illustration: Tarantula
                                         (Photo by Marvin H. Frost Sr.)]

This name originated in southern Italy where, centuries ago, according
to a story, in the little town of Tarantum (now Taranto) there developed
an epidemic of “tarentism” supposedly resulting from the bite of a large
wolf spider (Lycosa tarantula). Victims were affected with melancholy,
stupor, and an irresistible desire to dance. Presumably, the Neapolitan
folk dance, Tarentella, came about as a result of an effort to develop a
cure for tarentism.

Early day immigrants brought to the western hemisphere both the
unreasoning fear of spider bites and the name “tarantula,” which they
applied to the large and fearsome-looking bird spider of the Southwest.
Since that time this superstitious fear has become established among the
uneducated and uninformed people of the southwestern United States,
where the bird spiders are numerous.

It has been spread and aggravated by prolific writers of western
thrillers, published in the pulp-paper magazines. Fantastic tales in
which the big spiders followed their victims, sprang upon them from
distances of from 6 to 10 feet, and inflicted painful bites resulting in
lingering, agonizing death have had wide circulation and have found a
credulous audience.

Tarantulas are nearsighted, and their habit of pouncing upon
grasshoppers and other large insects on which they prey is probably the
basis for exaggerated stories of their jumping abilities. Their strong,
sharp fangs can inflict a painful bite, but they use them only rarely in
defense against human molestation. Stahnke states that any effects
produced appear to be the result of bacterial infection rather than that
of poison, although a mild poison is present. Treatment of tarantula
bite with iodine or similar antiseptic is recommended.

One species of Avicularia and several of Aphonopelma range
throughout the Southwest where they are active during spring, summer,
and autumn months. They live in web-lined holes in the ground, usually
located on south-facing slopes. The males are commonly encountered
traveling across country, and are particularly noticeable as they cross
a highway.

Preying upon insects, these large and interesting desert dwellers are
beneficial rather than harmful to mankind, and deserve protection.

Unfortunately, many become the innocent victims of the wholly
unwarranted fear in which they are held because of the fantastic stories
regarding their purported poisonous characteristics.




                              Conenose bug
      (Kissing bug, Bellows bug, Walpai tiger, Cross bug, others)
                            (Triatoma sp.)


Although not limited to the deserts of the Southwest, conenose bugs, of
which there are several species, are commonly associated with
subtropical climates.

Certain South American species of the family Reduviidae are disease
carrying and there is evidence the conenoses in San Diego County,
California, are infected with a disease-producing flagellate. Lack of
large bug populations in close contact with man and ineffective
transmission habits protect man in the Southwest from disease contacts.
However, the site of the bug’s bite becomes inflamed, and swelling may
spread over an area up to a foot in diameter.

In general appearance, conenose bugs resemble assassin and squash bugs,
with protruding eyes at the base of a cone-shaped snout and are about
the same size. Some species are considerably smaller, while others
attain a length of an inch or more.


Habitat of conenose bugs

Since conenose bugs subsist upon animal blood which they suck from the
capillaries by inserting the stylets of the proboscis, they seek
locations where there is a source of blood. These include livestock
barns, poultry houses, and human habitations.

    [Illustration: Conenose bugs—Triatoma protracta
    Adult male (rounded abdomen); Adult female (pointed abdomen)
                                (Photo courtesy of Dr. Sherwin F. Wood)]

Studies conducted by Wehrle[5] show that conenoses are parasitic on
woodrats and breed in the dens of these rodents. They are also found in
meadow vole (mouse) nests. Early in May the winged conenose adults begin
dispersal flights, invading human habitations in the vicinity of woodrat
dens. Although reported as most active in May and June, they may be
expected throughout the summer until October, and are much more numerous
in the country than in cities.

During the daytime, the insects remain hidden under rugs, between
quilts, or even in bedding or behind drapes. They may be seen during the
evening on ceiling beams, walls, curtains, and around windows. They are
alert and difficult to catch.

Conenose bugs do not attack people until the victim is quiet or asleep,
and may take blood without awakening the host. Immediately after being
bitten, however, the victim is awakened by severe itching. The area
about the puncture swells and becomes red and feverish. Welts at the
point of puncture are hard, and may be 1 to 3 inches in diameter.

About 5% of the people repeatedly bitten develop severe allergic
reactions with burning pain and itching at the site of the bite, itching
on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, neck, and groin; general
body swelling, and a nettle-like rash over the body. Some persons feel
ill, with light depression followed by quickening of the pulse. Others
are faint, weak, and nauseated. In very severe allergy these symptoms
may lead to anaphylactic shock and unconsciousness.


Treatment of conenose bites

Although a specific treatment for conenose bites has not been developed,
some physicians use epinephrine. More promising results appear possible
with antihistamine preparations (under doctor’s prescription) such as
benadryl and pyribenzamine, which have been effective by mouth, and in
severe reactions, by intravenous injections.

Matheson[6] writes: “When a blood-sucking insect bites, it is always
possible that the proboscis may be contaminated with pathogenic
organisms. If such organisms become localized near the point of puncture
or gain access to the blood stream, results may be serious. It is always
wise to use some disinfectant such as alcohol, tincture of iodine, etc.,
and to press out the blood, if possible, from bites made by insects.”
Antibiotics are frequently necessary to control the extremely high
percentage of secondary infections.

Physicians recommend the application of a hot Epsom salt pack over the
point of puncture as soon as possible after the bite has been received.
Application of antiphlogistine alleviates the severe itching. ACTH is
recommended by some physicians. Hydrocortizone ointments reduce the skin
eruptions and local pain.


Control of conenose bugs

Prevention is more satisfactory than treatment, and since conenoses live
in woodrat dens, these rodents should be eliminated from the vicinity.
Weatherstripping around all permanent doors and screen doors,
tight-fitting, holeless screens in all windows, and fine screens in
fireplace chimneys will help to keep the bugs out of houses.
Occasionally they may be seen on walls and ceilings in the evening, and
may be killed with a flyswatter.

If impossible to keep the insects out of the house, sleeping persons may
be protected by the use of mosquito netting. It is especially important
that the beds of babies and young children should be safe-guarded
because of the danger from scorpions.

    [Illustration: Common ant]

Bedding should be shaken thoroughly just before children retire, because
both scorpions and conenose bugs have a habit of concealing themselves
in bedding during the daytime.




                       Ants, wasps, hornets, bees


Stinging insects all belong to the group Hymenoptera and consist of
the families Apidae (honeybee, etc.), Bombidae (bumblebee),
Vespidae (wasps and hornets), Sphecidae (thread-waisted wasps),
Mutillidae (velvet ants), and Formicidae (the ants).

    [Illustration: Wasp]

In general, the only treatment recommended for insect stings is to
bathe the parts with ordinary liquid household bluing just as soon as
possible after the sting has been received, and apply hot compresses.
However, certain specific treatments are advised, depending upon the
particular species or condition.

Some persons are extremely susceptible to insect bites and stings, and
preliminary work has been done in trying to immunize those sensitive
individuals, but, in general, with very little success. The problem of
immunizing or desensitizing persons who are allergic to insect bites and
stings is one of considerable importance, as such unfortunate persons
will testify.

Because of the fact that honeybees are of such great economic
importance, not only as producers of an important food but also as
pollenizers of fruit, vegetable, seed, and other crops, they will be
discussed separately from the other stinging insects.

Everyone is familiar with ants, wasps, hornets, and bumblebees, and
there are very few persons who have not had unpleasant experiences with
one or more of these groups of insects.


Ants and velvet ants

Velvet ants, which are in reality wingless wasps and not true ants, are
not as well known as the others, although the little creatures that
scurry about like brightly dyed bits of cotton are quite numerous in the
desert.

The primary purpose of the sting is to paralyze or kill their prey,
although it becomes more important as a weapon of defense with insects
which do not prey upon or parasitize other creatures. Although the
solitary insects use their poison as a means of personal defense if
attacked or imposed upon, the social insects such as ants, social wasps
and hornets, honeybees, and others, rally to the defense of their nests
and in mass attacks against an intruder may cause painful and sometimes
serious injury.

Although the small amount of poison introduced beneath the skin by the
sting of one of these creatures usually causes only temporary
discomfort, there are sometimes after effects which may be more intense
and of longer duration with some persons than with others. In general,
stinging insects may be considered more as a nuisance than a menace,
although a person attacked by a large number, or subjected to their
stings for some length of time, might receive serious and perhaps fatal
injuries. Known deaths have been caused by the sting of imported fire
ants in southeastern States. The species is believed to be spreading.
Treatment by a physician may include the use of ACTH and calmitol.

Although ants and velvet ants are commonly considered as wingless, they
are, actually, winged. Male velvet ants have wings whereas the females
are normally without wings. The females have a very effective sting, and
if picked up or pinched they make every effort to use it, at the same
time emitting a peculiar faint squeaking sound.

True ants, of which there are hundreds of species, are social insects
living in colonies containing the mother, or queen, which becomes
wingless after fertilization; numerous workers, or non-fertile females;
and young winged males and females.

    [Illustration: Velvet ant]


Control of ants

Ants of various species are numerous on the desert, some of them
becoming serious household pests, difficult to control.

There are effective ant poisons on the market, but the surest method of
control is to find the nest and destroy it. Ants that are household
pests usually are either grease eaters or sweet eaters, and the proper
poison for the specific type should be obtained in attempting to rid the
house of these insects.


Wasps, hornets, yellowjackets, bees

Wasps, hornets, yellowjackets, and bees of many species are common in
the desert, some species being solitary in habit while others live in
colonies or nests which they defend with great pugnacity.

    [Illustration: Bumblebee]

Although humans have little to fear from these insects if they leave
them strictly alone, some species select nest sites beneath overhanging
eaves or in attics or lofts, thus becoming persistent pests. They are
usually tolerated until one or more members of the family are stung.

Other species are attracted to human habitations by the presence of
sweets or other edibles, and make persistent nuisances of themselves.
They are capable of inflicting painful injuries, and are greatly feared
by many persons.

Not usually serious, these injuries do not respond to any treatment
that has yet been developed. Immediate application of strong ammonium
hydroxide (household ammonia) is a home treatment which has been found
helpful for ant stings, and, in most cases, for the stings of other
insects.

A piece of ice held at the point of puncture will relieve the pain and
burning sensation in the majority of cases of insect sting.

In serious cases, of course, the services of a physician should be
obtained immediately.




                                Honeybee
                           (Apis mellifera)


At first thought it may seem unjustified to include the common honeybee
in a discussion of poisonous creatures of the desert. Although the
honeybee is not a desert native, having been imported from Europe, it
has established itself in the wild state throughout the Southwest in
locations providing adequate moisture and sufficient nectar-producing
flowers.

    [Illustration: Honeybees on the honeycomb]

Throughout much of the United States honeybees are encountered in
numbers only in apiaries operated by beekeepers, or in bee trees where
the insects have established themselves. In the desert climatic
conditions are ideal for honeybees, and they have become widespread and
well established.

They obtain water at springs, seeps, waterholes, cattle tanks, dripping
faucets, and leaking water containers, often congregating in such
numbers around sources of water that they become a distinct nuisance to
men and to animals. Individual honeybees are frequently found in
flowers, or may fly in through an open automobile window, and sting one
of the car’s occupants. Small children sometimes receive stings while
playing on white clover lawns or going barefoot. Farm boys may be
severely stung as a result of beehives or throwing stones at
bees’ nests in trees or caves.

Normally, poison introduced by the sting of a honeybee is local in
effect and little more than a painful inconvenience to the person stung.
There are many cases on record, however, of persons and domestic animals
receiving stings from so many of the enraged insects that serious and
even fatal results have followed.

During the past half century, medical records show a number of deaths
each resulting from a single sting. Jones[7] made an intensive study of
this problem and was able to show conclusively that occasional
individuals become supersensitive to honeybee venom. If persons in such
condition receive even the small amount of poison injected by a single
sting, the resulting excessive susceptibility may be fatal unless proper
treatment is administered immediately. To such persons the honeybee is
definitely a poisonous and dangerous creature.

    [Illustration: Poison mechanism of worker bee, greatly enlarged.]

  1. Poison sack or reservoir.
  2. Muscles which force sting into flesh and pump poison from sack.
          These muscles continue operating for as long as 20 minutes
          after the sting has been torn from the bee’s body.
  3. Sheath within which shafts of sting slide.
  4. Barbed tip of sting. These barbs hold the sting in the flesh of the
          victim so securely as to tear the sting from the body of the
          bee.


How a bee stings

The poison-injecting mechanism of the worker bee is located within the
extremity of the abdomen and consists of a barbed sting at the base of
which is attached a sack, or reservoir, containing the poison. Male bees
(drones) have no sting, and the queen reserves hers for possible use in
battle with a rival queen.

In the act of stinging, the bee forces the tip of the sting through the
skin of the victim, where it becomes imbedded, being held by the barbs.
In escaping the bee tears away, leaving the sting, poison sack, and
attached muscles and viscera. Incidentally, this rupture results in the
death of the bee.

Capillarity and the spasmodic movement of the attached muscles force the
poison from the sack through the hollow shaft of the sting into the
wound.


Treatment of bee sting

To counteract this, the first thing that anyone should do when stung by
a honeybee is to SCRAPE out the sting. This may be done with a knife
blade or even with the fingernail, although the latter is far from
sanitary. NEVER PULL OUT THE STING, because in grasping the protruding
poison sack between the thumb and forefinger, the sack is certain to be
pinched and the poison squeezed into the wound.

Since, under normal conditions, it takes several seconds for the
contents of the sack to work into the puncture, prompt removal of the
sting with the attached sack prevents much of the poison from being
injected.

Application of strong household ammonia just as soon as the sting is
scraped out is helpful in allaying the pain.

If a person receives a great number of stings, a physician should be
summoned at once. The victim should be undressed, put in bed, and all of
the sting scraped out. All parts of the body that have received stings
should be covered with cloths soaked in hot water and wrung out. These
applications should be as hot as the victim can endure.

Persons who are supersensitive to bee-sting venom show the following
symptoms when stung: the skin over the entire body breaks out in lumpy
welts, palms of the hands and soles of the feet itch. This is followed
by headache, nausea, and vomiting. Breathing becomes labored and heart
action is rapid and weak.

As soon as such symptoms are noted, a physician should be summoned or
the victim taken to a hospital. Treatment consists of frequent, small,
hypodermic injections of epinephrine in the ratio of one part of
epinephrine to 1,000 parts of water. Dr. W. Ray Jones[7], who developed
and perfected this treatment, reports that it is immediately effective
and recommends that all commercial beekeepers provide themselves with
hypodermic kits and a small supply of epinephrine.

Even persons who are apparently immune to bee-sting venom through having
received bee stings during the course of many years of work in the
apiary, may suddenly develop supersensitivity. The treatment is
relatively simple, may be self-administered, and has already proved
effective in treating serious cases of excessive susceptibility
resulting from supersensitive persons receiving bee stings.

Experimental use of calcium lactate to counteract “sting shock”
indicates a high degree of success. Physicians should investigate “Death
by Sting Shock,” p 234, Science News Letter, April 9, 1955. Use of
antihistamines or a hormone of the cortizone family has had some
success.




                            Puss Caterpillar
                       (Megalopyge opercularis)


Superficially resembling a tiny, light, golden-yellow kitten, the puss
caterpillar is a short, bushy larva of a small gray-brown moth with
whitish underwings. When disturbed, the caterpillar rears back on its
hind legs and “makes a face.” The species has long been widespread
throughout the southern states feeding on the foliage of oak, elm, plum,
and sycamore trees. They have been found also in truck gardens and
orchards. Recently they have invaded the desert mountains of the
Southwest, having been reported by Stahnke as especially numerous in the
Globe-Miami area of Arizona, feeding on the foliage of oaks.

    [Illustration: Puss caterpillar
                                      (Courtesy Dr. Herbert L. Stahnke)]

Because of their long, silky hairs, children are tempted to touch them.
Under the hairs are small protrusions, each bearing a circlet of very
small spines resembling tiny porcupine quills. The venom is injected
when these spines pierce the child’s skin and the tips break off,
producing a burning, itching, irritated, inflamed area. The welts,
ranging in size from a dime to a dollar, are sometimes followed by
severe muscle cramps and headache. Not lethal, the toxin may cause
enough sleeplessness in a child to reduce his resistance to other
infections.

Treatment suggested by Dr. Bernard J. Collopy, Assistant Medical
Director of the Miami-Inspiration Hospital of Miami, Arizona, consists
of immersing the inflamed area in iced water for thirty minutes. Remove
for one minute at ten minute intervals for relief from the cold. The
skin may blister and peel at the site much as in the case of a first
degree burn, but should heal completely in ten days. Some physicians
suggest an opiate for relief of pain in severe cases. Cooling lotions
may be applied to relieve the itching.




                          Arizona coral snake
                      (Micruroides euryxanthus)


The coral snake, of which there are two species in the United States,
belongs to the Elapine group, which is represented in the Old World by
the cobras and other poisonous snakes. These two species, the coral
snake of the Gulf States, and the smaller Arizona coral snake whose
range extends into the desert lands of southern New Mexico and Arizona,
are the only representatives of the Elapine group found in this
country.

    [Illustration: Arizona coral snake
                                        (Photo by Marvin H. Frost, Sr.)]

The Arizona coral is shy and secretive in its habits, timid rather than
pugnacious, and it is so rarely seen that little is known of its habits.

The poison mechanism of the coral snake is somewhat different from that
of the pit viper group, to which the copperheads, cottonmouths, and
rattlesnakes belong. The teeth of the coral are short, and to be
effective the coral snake must chew rather than strike its victim.

The Arizona coral snake is so small—rarely reaching 2 feet in length—and
its mouth is so tiny, that it would be very difficult for it to bite an
adult human. It is conceivable that a small child playing with one might
be bitten.

Because of its close resemblance to several ringed or banded snakes of
the desert and also to the Arizona mountain kingsnake, or “coral”
kingsnake, of the ponderosa pine highlands of the Southwest, a brief
description of the Arizona coral snake is indicated. One of the
beautifully spectacular snakes of the desert, it is marked by bands of
dark red, cream, and, which encircle the body. Superficially the
markings of the Arizona mountain kingsnake and other tricolored ringed
snakes appear similar. However, the red of the kingsnake and of others
is usually brighter, and the bands narrower than those of the
coral.

Definite identification is provided by the relationship of the colors to
each other, the arrangement on the Arizona coral snake being red, cream,, cream, red, cream,, cream. The bands of the Arizona coral
snake entirely circle the body and its snout is.




                              Rattlesnakes
                        (Genus Crotalus, spp.)


Thirty species and subspecies of rattlesnakes occur in the United
States, more than half of this number being found in the Southwest.
Because they have been killed on sight for years, their numbers have
been considerably reduced in densely populated areas. For this reason,
together with emphasis placed upon their poisonous characteristics by
some writers of western thriller fiction, rattlesnakes are considered by
many people to be a serious menace in the thinly populated portions of
the arid West[8].

    [Illustration: Western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox.)
                                                (Photo by Earl Jackson)]


Where rattlesnakes are found

In the hot desert regions of the Southwest rattlesnakes are usually
abroad at night during the summer months, as they have no controlling
system for body temperature and cannot endure the heat at ground surface
during the hours of sunlight. In spring and autumn they may be
encountered in the daytime but during December, January, and February
they are in hibernation and are rarely or never seen.

Their food consists principally of lizards and small rodents such as
ground squirrels, rats, mice, pocket gophers and young rabbits. They are
sometimes found along irrigation canal banks where they go for water,
and because they find rodents congregating there for the same reason.
Unless surprised, cornered, teased, handled, or injured, a rattlesnake
usually will try to remain hidden or will endeavor to crawl away rather
than strike. Because they are attracted to places where small rodents
abound, they are sometimes encountered around barns and outbuildings.
They occasionally enter abandoned structures in search of food or to
escape from the heat of the sun.


Protective clothing

Because a rattlesnake may be met at almost any time, except during the
winter months, by a person who lives, works, or visits in the desert, he
should be ever alert. If hiking or climbing through country where
rattlesnakes are known to be abundant, he should wear clothing that will
protect him from a possible bite.

Pope[9] states that records kept during 1928 and 1929 show that 98 per
cent of snake bites occurred below the knee or on the hand or forearm.
When in snake country, the hiker should wear knee-high boots or
leggings, and should never place his hand on a rock or ledge above the
level of his eyes. In other words, watch your step, and look before you
reach! Apparently rattlesnakes may strike at a quick movement and are
very sensitive to the body warmth of a nearby warm-blooded creature.


Rattlesnake relatives

Rattlesnakes belong to the group known as the pit vipers, which includes
the cottonmouths and the copperheads. The latter do not occur in the
desert, so they do not come within the province of this publication.
Snakes of the pit viper group are characterized by a noticeable
depression, or pit, found almost halfway between the eye and the
nostril, but slightly lower, on each side of the head.

Of the several species found in the desert, some, such as the western
diamondback rattlesnake have a wide range, while others are restricted
to limited areas. Some species attain large size, while others are quite
small; some are inclined to be pugnacious, while others are more or less
docile. All are dangerous!

It is not within the scope of this publication to enter into a
discussion of the many species, so the reader who wishes to pursue that
subject further is referred to Klauber’s publication on the
rattlesnakes[10].


The Sidewinder

There is one rattlesnake of the desert that should be especially
mentioned: the sidewinder, or the little horned rattlesnake. It is
called sidewinder because of the peculiar method of locomotion that
enables it to progress in the sandy habitat which it frequents. Unable
to get sufficient traction in loose sand by moving as other snakes do,
it throws a portion of its body ahead as a loop, thus serving to anchor
or pull the rest of the body ahead. Thus it progresses sideways in a
looping, or winding, motion most interesting to observe.

    [Illustration: Sidewinder or “horned” rattlesnake]

Although the term sidewinder is often used loosely in referring to other
species of rattlesnakes, it actually applies only to this particular
species—Crotalus cerastes.


Helpful precautions

In snake country, it is important to take a flashlight along whenever
there is occasion to go outside at night in summer to be sure that there
are no rattlesnakes lying across your path. If you sleep out of doors.
keep your bed off the ground if possible. The widely believed statement
that, “a rattlesnake will not crawl across a hair rope” is not true,
although such a statement will often precipitate an argument.

Persons much in the field should provide themselves with a suction-type
snakebite kit, and should know how to use it. Although you stand 200
chances of being killed by an automobile to one of dying from snakebite,
the price of a suction-type kit is cheap insurance against that
possibility.


First aid for rattlesnake bite

If, in spite of all precautions, you or some companion should be bitten
by a rattlesnake, first-aid should be rendered at once. This is not
difficult if you have a snakebite kit, and it is possible even if you
do not.

The following steps are quite universally accepted:

1. Apply a tourniquet a short distance above the bite (that is between
it and the heart) but do not make it too tight. This prevents the blood
and lymph carrying the poison from being spread rapidly through the
body. The tourniquet should be loosened for a few seconds every 20
minutes.

2. Make a short cut about one-fourth inch deep and one-fourth inch long
near each fang puncture with a sharp, sterile instrument. A knife or
razor blade sterilized in the flame of a match will do.

3. Apply suction to the cuts. If no suction cup is available, the mouth
will do if it contains no open sores.

4. If antivenin is available, administer it according to instructions,
but, if possible, this should be left to a physician. (Recent
experiments with antivenin indicate that, in some cases, its reaction
may be harmful and that it should be administered only under the care of
a physician.)

5. Get the patient to medical help as soon as possible, continuing the
first-aid treatment enroute. Keep the patient quiet and do not let him
get frightened or excited. Rather than require the patient to walk or
otherwise exercise, medical aid should be brought to him.

6. If medical help is not available, and if Epsom salts can be
obtained, apply cloths soaked in a strong, hot solution of Epsom salts
over the cuts. The sucking, however, should be continued for at least
half an hour, preferably for an hour or more. Never give alcoholic
stimulants or use permanganate of potash. Snakebite kits give complete
instructions; follow them carefully.

    [Illustration: Poison mechanism of the rattlesnake
                                                   Redrawn from Dr. Fox]

  1. Poison gland.
  2. Hollow fang.
  3. Poison duct.
  4. Constrictor muscle.
  5. Eye.
  6. Nasal opening.
  7. Pouch enclosing fangs (not shown in drawing).
  8. Tongue.

Rattlesnake venom contains digestive enzymes which attack and destroy
tissue, and because of this and the possibility of bacterial infection
introduced by cutting the skin, another method of treatment—cryotherapy
(treatment with cold)—advocated by Dr. Herbert L. Stahnke, Poisonous
Animals Laboratory, Arizona State University, seems to be gaining more
and more support. This technique is designed to prevent and control the
chemical action of the venom and of bacteria, as well as minimizing
stress. This latter action is extremely important, since recent research
work has indicated that the physiological products produced by the body
under stress may more than double the toxic effects of the venom.
Cut-and-suction, or any similar treatment, tends to greatly increase
stress.

The following description of treatment is excerpted from “American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,” Volume 6, Number 2, March,
1957, The Treatment of Snake Bite, by Herbert L. Stahnke, Fredrick M.
Allen, Robert V. Horan, and John H. Tenery:

1. Place a ligature (tight tourniquet) at once between the site of the
bite and the body, but as near the point of entrance of the venom as
possible.

2. Place a piece of ice on the site while preparing a suitable vessel
of crushed ice and water.

3. Place the bitten hand or other in the iced water well above
the point of ligation.

4. After the envenomed has been in the iced water for not less
than 5 minutes (N.B. research has shown that the danger generally
attributed to a ligature is not present when the is
refrigerated), remove the ligature, but keep the in the iced
water for at least 2 hours.

5. Pack the envenomed in finely crushed ice. This hypothermia
must continue for approximately 24 hours, and the patient must not be
permitted to chill, since this increases body stress.

6. Change from hypothermia to cryotherapy. This is accomplished as
follows: after the first 24 hours following the bite, the patient should
be kept somewhat uncomfortably warm—that is, to the point of
perspiration—and encouraged to drink much water. This step is
exceedingly important. Unless the patient is kept uncomfortably warm the
proteolytic portion of the venom will not leave the site of the bite.
Consequently, when hypothermia is stopped, the concentration of this
part of the venom is greater and the tissue destruction will be
proportionately increased. Hypothermia should be avoided entirely if
this step is not meticulously observed.

    [Illustration: Western-headed snake (Tantilla eiseni).
                            (Courtesy San Diego Natural History Museum)]

    [Illustration: Sonora lyre snake (Trimorphodon lambda).
                                        (Photo by Marvin H. Frost, Sr.)]

7. The warm-up period after Cryotherapy is important. This must be done
gradually. Remove the from the crushed ice and place it in ice
water (without ice). Allow the water to warm to room temperature.

Dr. Walter C. Alvarez in the Santa Fe New Mexican, 8-18-57: “Recently,
Dr. Wm. Deichmann, John E. Dees, M. L. Keplinger, John J. Farrell, and
W. E. MacDonald Jr. reported that hydrocortizone is a life-saving drug
when given to animals that have suffered poisoning from rattlesnake
venom. Instead of only the 17% of the untreated animals that survived,
75% of treated animals were saved.”




                           Back-fanged snakes


The southwestern desert regions are credited with harboring several
genera of snakes whose grooved back teeth indicate that they may have
poisonous properties. Of these, the Sonora lyre snake[11] (Trimorphodon
lambda) and the Mexican vine snake (Oxybelis aeneus auratus) are the
only species of sufficient size to be considered as even remotely
dangerous to mankind. Species of the genera Tantilla -headed
snake), Hypsiglena, and Sonora are too small and too difficult for
the amateur to identify to be considered in this publication.




                              Gila monster
                        (Heloderma suspectum)


More conflicting statements are made about the Gila (HEE-lah) monster
than about any other desert reptile. Some persons insist that it is not
poisonous, others are sure that even its breath is poisonous: that it
spits or blows its poison: that the animal has no anal opening, hence
undigested fecal matter remains in the body, decays, and is the basis of
its poison; and so on.

    [Illustration: Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum).]

Here are the facts. The lizard is poisonous and its bite may be serious,
possibly fatal[13]. Its breath is not poisonous, and although the animal
seems to have a chronic case of halitosis, this has nothing to do with
its dangerous properties. It does not spit poison, but when angered it
frequently hisses, the outcoming blast of air sometimes carrying
droplets of saliva. It has a normal anal opening and voids fecal matter
in a perfectly normal manner. It is not a walking septic tank as many
persons believe.

Largest of the lizards native to the United States, and the only species
found in this country which is poisonous, the Gila monster rarely
attains a length of 2 feet. Average specimens are smaller. Its beady
skin, heavy body, short legs, and waddling gait set it apart from all
other lizards except its close relative, the also poisonous Heloderma
horridum of Mexico. The Gila Monster is a spectacular and corral
color, while the other is and yellow.

Gila monsters are found in southern Arizona, their range extending
northwestward into the southern tip of Nevada and southwestern Utah.

    [Illustration: Underside of Gila monster showing anal opening. This
    photograph is advanced as proof that the Gila monster is a perfectly
    normal creature in this respect.
        (Photo courtesy of Poisonous Animals Research Laboratory, Tempe,
                                                               Arizona)]


Food and habits

Food consists chiefly of bird and reptile eggs, young rodents, and such
small or juvenile creatures as it is able to capture. It is especially
fond of hen eggs and may be kept in captivity for a long time without
other food. It is also fond of clear water, which seems strange because
of the scarcity of this liquid in the natural habitat of the lizard. If
provided with a basin of water it may lie partly submerged for hours.

Occasionally encountered ambling across stretches of open desert,
especially in the spring, the Gila monster is normally docile and bends
every effort toward escape among the stiff stems of some bush or beneath
the protecting spine-clad stems of a cactus plant. Sometimes an
individual with a “chip on its shoulder” may be met, or one in a normal
state of mind may be teased or prodded into anger, when it advances with
open mouth, sputtering and hissing.

When, the Gila monster is remarkably agile, making quick turns
of its head to snap at nearby objects. If it secures a grip, it hangs on
with bulldog-like tenacity, grinding the object between its teeth.

Gila monsters reproduce by means of eggs which are about 2½ inches long
with a tough, parchment-like skin. From 5 to 13 eggs are deposited by
the female in a hole which she scoops in moist sand in a sunny location.
After laying the eggs, she covers them with sand, and leaves them for
the heat of the sun to hatch.

    [Illustration: Poison mechanism of the Gila monster
                                                   Redrawn from Dr. Fox]

  1. Poison gland.
  2. Grooved tooth.
  3. Poison duct.
  4. Opening, poison duct.
  5. Eye.
  6. Dissected lower jaw.

The Gila monster’s tail serves as a storehouse of nourishment, being
thick and heavy in times of plenty, and thin and rope-like in the early
spring when the reptile first appears after months of hibernation,
during which time it has lived on the reservoir of fat stored in its
tail.


Poison of the Gila monster

The poison of the Gila monster is produced by glands in the lower jaw.
To be most effective, the poison must be ground into the wound through
action of the grooved teeth, the process taking a little time. Bitten
persons who immediately have broken away sometimes show no effects of
the venom, therein lying the basis for the widespread statement that
Gila monsters are not poisonous.

Bitten persons who have been unable to release themselves show symptoms
of poisoning similar to persons suffering from rattlesnake bite,
although the poison is more neurotoxic in action. Breathing and heart
action are speeded up, followed by a gradual paralysis of the heart and
breathing muscles.

Treatment is essentially the same as that for rattlesnake bite, which
is described earlier in this booklet. A physician should be summoned at
once. Stimulants are dangerous, and no one should be permitted to give
the patient any alcohol whatever.

Prevention is much simpler than cure, so Gila monsters should be allowed
to mind their own affairs. Normally they are not pugnacious,
and it would be very difficult for one to bite a human unless it were
being teased or handled or were stepped upon by a bare-footed child.
Please do not kill or capture Gila monsters. These interesting lizards
are a unique feature of native desert wildlife threatened with
extinction. Please leave them for other people to see and enjoy.
Furthermore, the Gila monster is protected by State law.




            Harmless Creatures Mistakenly Believed Poisonous


Practically everyone is aware of the widespread fear of snakes exhibited
by people of all races and in all walks of life. This fear although
largely emotional, is rationalized by many persons with the statement
“Well, it MIGHT be poisonous.” Other persons believe that there is some
rule of thumb, such as a flat or triangular-shaped head, by which all
poisonous snakes may be recognized. A great many persons kill all
snakes, just on general principles. Thus the innocent suffer with the
guilty, the harmless with the dangerous.

As scientists explore deeper and deeper into the intricacies of animal
behavior and obtain more and more knowledge of the ecological
relationships among animals and between animals and plants, it becomes
increasingly clear that these relationships present a delicate balance
or adjustment of nature. Epidemic diseases, disasters such as fires and
floods, and radical climatic changes may upset or alter these
relationships, sometimes with far-reaching effects.

But the greatest and most persistent disturber of the biological peace
is MAN. Almost every time man reduces or destroys one phase of nature,
he releases, in so doing, previously unrecognized forces which turn on
him in a manner that he least expects. Snakes, in general, live on small
rodents, thereby helping to maintain a balance whereby rodents are
unable to increase to such a point that they get out of nature’s
control. Kill all of the snakes in a given area, and some of the control
on rodent population is removed with a resulting increase in the
destruction of vegetation and consequent damage to farmers’ crops. So if
you must kill snakes, by all means limit your activities to those which
are known definitely to be poisonous.

One of the purposes of this booklet is to familiarize the desert dweller
or visitor with the snakes that ARE poisonous. All the rest are
harmless, in fact they are generally beneficial to mankind, even though
their heads may be triangular in shape. A given territory is capable of
supporting a rather definite number of snakes. Kill the harmless ones
and those that come in to take their place may be poisonous species.

In all parts of the country certain creatures, particularly reptiles,
are credited with supernatural powers for causing injury or aid to human
beings. Among aboriginal peoples, these superstitions are a part of
their religion and have a powerful effect upon their thinking. For
example, among the Hopi Indians of northern Arizona, snakes may be
messengers who, if properly indoctrinated, will convey to the rain gods
expressions of the people’s need for moisture in order that their crops
may mature.

Even among a people who for years have had the benefit of scientific
knowledge, superstitions persist. The hoopsnake and the milksnake offer
cases in point, and there will be readers of this booklet who will toss
it aside in anger because it states that both of these myths are without
substantiation in fact.

    [Illustration: Two adult banded gecko lizards]

These imaginary tales are passed from generation to generation and are
the strongest in regions where the percentage of uneducated people is
high. This situation exists in the South and Southwest. Many persons who
have been denied educational opportunities are extremely credulous and
have a long list of creatures to each of which they credit injurious or
helpful powers. A majority of these creatures are perfectly harmless,
but they are too numerous to be given space in this publication.
However, it seems only fair to mention a few of the commonest of these
persecuted species in the hope that they may be recognized as not only
harmless, but in many cases actually beneficial to man. Thus may their
unwarranted persecution be somewhat reduced.




                              Banded gecko
                        (Coleonyx variegatus)


Quite small, with velvety skin and delicate markings making it appear
fragile and semitransparent, this lizard has little to inspire fear.
Hiding away during daylight hours in dark and preferably moist retreats,
it comes forth at night in search of insects for food.

It is rarely seen unless disturbed in its hiding place, which may be in
the corner of a closet or cupboard beneath the sink. If captured, it
struggles to escape, emitting a faint, high-pitched squeak.

Although the banded gecko is sometimes mistaken for the young of a Gila
monster, in general the desert people accuse it of no definite crime,
stating merely “we have heard that it is very poisonous,” and in
consequence, kill it whenever they find it.




                                Solpugid
                           (Eremobates sp.)


Probably because of its large and prominent jaws, the solpugid,
Eremobates sp., which is closely related to the spiders, is greatly
feared.

    [Illustration: Solpugid or sun Spider]

“Anything so ugly MUST be poisonous,” seems to be the principal basis
for its unhappy reputation.

It is often found inside buildings where it has gone in search of insect
prey, and Mexican families living in adobe houses with dirt floors are
reported to be terrorized by it. In Mexico and in many parts of the
Southwest it is known as niña de la tierra or child-of-the-earth.

The range of the solpugid or sun spider is by no means limited to the
desert, but its reputation as a poisonous creature seems to be much
worse in the Southwest than elsewhere.

The solpugid not only is perfectly harmless to man but does not rely on
poison in capturing its prey, as it has no venom glands whatever.




                           Jerusalem cricket
                         (Stenopelmatus sp.)


Whereas the solpugid is called child-of-the-earth in the southern
portions of the Southwest, in the northern part of this territory
another creature, the Jerusalem cricket, sand cricket, or chacho is
reported as imbued with the same dangerous qualities evidently credited
to any creature to which this name has been applied.

    [Illustration: Jerusalem cricket, sand cricket, or chacho
                                        (Photo by Marvin H. Frost, Sr.)]

Although quite common, the Jerusalem cricket, Stenopelmatus sp., is
shy and nocturnal in its habits. Its striking appearance is due to its
head which is round, bald, and with markings on top that form, with the
use of a little imagination, a simple, smiling face. It is this that
suggests to the Spanish-speaking people of the Southwest, who
occasionally dig it from its burrow, the name “niña de la tierra.” The
Navajo Indians call it woh-seh-tsinni, meaning Old Man Bald-head.

By the superstitious natives, this creature is believed to be highly
venomous and frequently the death of a horse or cow is blamed by the
owner on a “chacho” that has crawled into the hay.

Actually, the Jerusalem cricket is harmless and may be handled with
perfect impunity by anyone, although it may inflict a painful nip.




                               Vinegaroon
                           (Trithyreus sp.)


Since people coming from Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas bring the
majority of tales regarding the deadly characteristics of the little
vinegaroon or whip-tail scorpion, fear of it is apparently more
widespread over the cotton belt as a whole than within the desert
regions of the Southwest.

    [Illustration: Vinegaroon
                                        (Photo by Marvin H. Frost, Sr.)]

The name vinegaroon stems from the fact that when the little creature is
injured or smashed it gives off the odor of an acetate similar to that
of acetic acid, the principal ingredient of vinegar.

Equipped with a massive pair of pincers, the vinegaroon, like the
solpugid, gives an impression of fierceness which is probably the basis
for much of its reputation as a dangerous criminal. However, the pincers
are used in catching and holding prey and have no poison mechanism in
connection.

The hairlike posterior appendage, or tail, is without any protective or
offensive mechanism whatever, so that the creature is perfectly harmless
insofar as human beings are concerned.

In fact, like the solpugid and the banded gecko, its food habits cause
it to rid the world of a great many insects during the course of its
life and many of its victims are certain to be noxious to the interests
of mankind.

All of these creatures, then, are not only harmless, but are actually
beneficial to man, and they deserve to be freed from the persecution
resulting from ignorance and superstition, and to be permitted to live
in their normal relationship with other creatures.


No one of the old Italian masters has taken such a firm hold upon the
popular imagination as Raphael. Other artists wax and wane in public
favor as they are praised by one generation of critics or disparaged
by the next; but Raphael's name continues to stand in public
estimation as that of the favorite painter in Christendom. The passing
centuries do not dim his fame, though he is subjected to severe
criticism; and he continues, as he began, the first love of the
people.

The subjects of his pictures are nearly all of a cheerful nature. He
exercised his skill for the most part on scenes which were agreeable
to contemplate. Pain and ugliness were strangers to his art; he was
preëminently the artist of joy. This is to be referred not only to his
pleasure-loving nature, but to the great influence upon him of the
rediscovery of Greek art in his day, an art which dealt distinctively
with objects of delight.

Moreover Raphael is compassionate towards mind as well as heart; he
requires of us neither too strenuous feeling nor too much thinking. As
his subjects do not overtax the sympathies with harrowing emotions,
neither does his art overtax the understanding with complicated
effects. His pictures are apparently so simple that they demand no
great intellectual effort and no technical education to enjoy them.
He does all the work for us, and his art is too perfect to astonish.
It was not his way to show what difficult things he could do, but he
made it appear that great art is the easiest thing in the world. This
ease was, however, the result of a splendid mastery of his art. Thus
he arranges the fifty-two figures in the School of Athens, or the
three figures of the Madonna of the Chair, so simply and unobtrusively
that we might imagine such feats were an every-day affair. Yet in both
cases he solves most difficult problems of composition with a success
scarcely paralleled in the history of art.

Even the Master himself seldom achieved the same kind of success
twice. His Parnassus lacks the variety of the School of Athens, though
the single figures have a similar grace, and the Incendio del Borgo or
Conflagration in the Borgo, with groups equal in beauty to any in the
other two frescoes, has not the unity of either. Again, while the
Parnassus and the Liberation of Peter show a masterly adaptation to
extremely awkward spaces, the Transfiguration fails to solve a much
easier problem of composition.

Preferring by an instinct such as the Greek artist possessed, the
statuesque effects of repose to the portrayal of action, Raphael
showed himself capable of both. The Hellenic calm of Parnassus is not
more impressive than the splendid charge of the avenging spirits upon
Heliodorus; the visionary idealism of the angel-led Peter is matched
by the vigorous realism of Peter called from his fishing to the
apostleship; the brooding quiet of maternity expressed in the Madonna
of the Chair has a perfect complement in the alert activity of the
swiftly moving Sistine Madonna.

Great as was Raphael's achievement in many directions, he is
remembered above all else as a painter of Madonnas. Here was the
subject best expressing the individuality of his genius. From the
beginning to the end of his career the sweet mystery of motherhood
never ceased to fascinate him. Again and again he sounded the depths
of maternal experience, always making some new discovery.

The Madonna of the Chair emphasizes most prominently, perhaps, the
physical instincts of maternity. "She bends over the child," says
Taine, "with the beautiful action of a wild animal." Like a mother
creature instinctively protecting her young, she gathers him in her
capacious embrace as if to shield him from some impending danger. The
Sistine Madonna, on the other hand, is the most spiritual of Raphael's
creations, the perfect embodiment of ideal womanhood. The mother's
love is here transfigured by the spirit of sacrifice. Forgetful of
self, and obedient to the heavenly summons, she bears her son forth to
the service of humanity.

Sister spirits of the Madonnas, and hardly second in delicate
loveliness, are the virgin saints of Raphael; the Catherine, the
Cecilia, the Magdalene, and the Barbara are abiding ideals in our
dreams of fair women.

The same sweetness of nature which prompted Raphael's fondness for
lovely women and happy children shows itself also in his delineation
of angels. The archangel Michael, the angel visitors of Abraham, and
the celestial spirits appearing to Heliodorus all follow closely upon
the Madonnas in the purity and serenity of their beauty. In the same
fellowship also belongs the beautiful youth in the crowd at Lystra,
who is as sharply contrasted with his surroundings as if he were a
denizen of another sphere. The ideal is again repeated in the St. John
of the Cecilia altar-piece, whose uplifted face has a sweetness which
is not so much feminine as celestial. The angel of Peter's deliverance
is less successful than the artist's other angel types. The head
seems too small for the splendidly vigorous body, and the face lacks
somewhat of strength.

If Raphael's favorite ideals were drawn from youth and womanhood, it
was not because he did not understand the purely masculine. The Æneas
of the Borgo fresco, the Paul of the Cecilia altar-piece, and the
Sixtus of the Sistine Madonna show, in three ages, what is best and
most distinctive in ideal manhood.

Raphael's type of beauty is not such as calls forth immediate or
extravagant admiration: it is satisfying rather than amazing, and its
qualities dawn slowly though steadily upon the imagination. Raphael
holds always to the golden mean; no exaggerated note jars upon the
perfection of his harmonies. For this reason his pictures never grow
tiresome. They stand the test of daily companionship and grow ever
lovelier through familiarity.

Without forcing the parallel, we may say that something of the same
spirit which animated the work of Raphael reappears in the familiar
poetry of Longfellow. The one artist had an eye for beautiful line,
the other had an ear for melodious verse, and both alike shunned
whatever was inharmonious, always seeking grace and symmetry. Their
subjects were, indeed, of dissimilar range. Raphael, impressed by the
scholarship of his time, chose themes which were larger and more
related to the experience of the world, while Longfellow was never
very far removed from the golden milestone of domestic life. Yet in
diverse subjects both turned instinctively to aspects of womanhood, to
what was refined and gently emotional, and turned away from the
violent and revolutionary.


II. ON BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

Within the last forty years the methods of criticism as applied to art
have undergone so many changes that there has been a rapid succession
of biographers and critics of Raphael until the student reader of
to-day scarcely knows whom to believe. The time was when Vasari, in
his important "Lives of the Painters," was the accepted source of
information, and all current writers borrowed unquestioningly from him
both facts and opinions; but the old chronicler was too often
influenced by popular gossip and personal prejudice to be depended
upon. Many of his stories are positively disproved by documentary
evidence, and for some years he has stood in dust and disgrace on the
upper shelves of the bookcase. From this exile a revised edition has
recently brought him forth to fresh honors. The joint work of Mr. and
Mrs. E. H. Blashfield with A. A. Hopkins has given us an annotated
text which we may read with equal pleasure and profit. This is
certainly the best of all reference books to put us in touch with the
period in which Raphael lived.

The German work on Raphael by Passavant, once so weighty, is now
useful only to those who have opportunity to compare it with other
authorities. So likewise the work of Crowe and Cavalcaselle is no
longer desirable as a sole authority. Even the splendid work of Eugene
Müntz (translated by Walter Armstrong), the latest and most valuable
of the comprehensive books on Raphael, must be read in the light of
later criticism. Müntz's volume contains a complete list of the
master's works,--frescoes, easel pictures, tapestries, drawings, and
works in architecture and sculpture,--each class subdivided according
to subject.

A few of the shorter biographies of Raphael have been corrected
according to the conclusions of the most recent critical scholarship,
as represented by Morelli. Notable among these is the life of Raphael
in Kugler's "Handbook of the Italian Schools," revised by A. H.
Layard, and the life of Raphael included in Mrs. Jameson's "Early
Italian Painters," revised by Estelle M. Hurll.

The latest entirely new short biographies of Raphael are those (1) by
Mrs. Henry Ady (Julia Cartwright), issued in two parts as monographs for
"The Portfolio:" the "Early Work of Raphael" and "Raphael in Rome," and
(2) by H. Knackfuss in a series of German "Künstler-Monographien" (also
published in an English translation). Both are well illustrated and
useful books.

Finally the student is referred to Bernhard Berenson's "Central
Italian Painters of the Renaissance" for an exceedingly valuable
estimate of Raphael's character as an artist.

Many books have been written on the separate works of Raphael,--the
Vatican frescoes, the cartoons, the Madonnas, etc.,--but as most of
these are in German and Italian they are not generally available. The
Blashfield Vasari enumerates a long list of them in the Bibliography
preceding the "Life of Raphael."


III. HISTORICAL DIRECTORY OF THE PICTURES OF THIS COLLECTION.

Portrait frontispiece. Painted on wood, 1506, as a gift from the
painter to his uncle, Simone Ciarla, of Urbino. In 1588 the portrait
passed from Urbino to the Academy of St. Luke, Rome. Later it was sold
to Cardinal Leopoldo de' Medici for the Hall of Portraits of the Old
Masters in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence.

1. The Madonna of the Chair is a wood panel 2 ft. 4-3/4 in.
diameter. It was painted between 1510-1514, and is now in the Pitti
Gallery, Florence.

2. Abraham and the Three Angels is a mural painting in the fourth
arcade of the Loggie, Vatican Palace, Rome. It was executed by
Francesco Penni.

3, 4. The Miraculous Draught of Fishes and The Sacrifice at Lystra
are cartoons in distemper colors. The execution was by Raphael's
pupils in 1515-1516. They were sent to Flanders as designs for
tapestries, and discovered by Rubens in a manufactory at Arras, 1630;
Charles I. of England purchased them, and they are now in the South
Kensington Museum, London.

5. Heliodorus driven from the Temple (detail of the larger
composition known by this name) is a mural painting which gives the
name to the Camera d' Eliodoro, Vatican Palace, Rome. The date of the
painting is 1511-1512.

6. The Liberation of Peter is a mural painting in the Camera d'
Eliodoro, Vatican Palace, Rome; the execution is by Giulio Romano,
1514.

7. The Holy Family of Francis I. is a canvas panel 8 ft. 9 in. by 5
ft. 3 in., painted for Lorenzo de' Medici, and presented by the Pope
Leo X. to Francis I. of France; hence the name. It was executed by
Giulio Romano in 1518, and is now in the Louvre, Paris.

8. St. Catherine of Alexandria is a wood panel 2 ft. 4 in. by I ft.
9-1/2 in., painted in 1507, and now in the National Gallery, London.

9. St. Cecilia is a panel painting which was transferred from wood
to canvas. It was painted about 1516 for the Church of S. Giovanni a
Monte, Bologna, and is now in the Bologna Gallery.

10. The Transfiguration, 14 ft. 9 in. by 9 ft. 1-1/2 in. Raphael
painted the upper part in 1519, and the picture was finished after his
death by Giulio Romano. It was ordered by the Cardinal de' Medici for
the Cathedral at Narbonne (France), but was retained in Rome after the
artist's death. It was taken to Paris during the French Revolution,
and restored to Rome in 1815. It is now in the Vatican Gallery.

11. Parnassus is a mural painting in the Camera della Segnatura,
Vatican Palace, Rome. The date is 1509-1511.

12. Socrates and Alcibiades (detail of the School of Athens) is a
mural painting in the Camera della Segnatura, Vatican Palace, Rome. It
was painted in 1509-1511.

13. The Flight of Æneas (detail of the Conflagration in the Borgo),
a mural painting in the Camera dell' Incendio, Vatican Palace, Rome.
It was executed by Giulio Romano about 1515.

14. St. Michael slaying the Dragon, a panel 8 ft. 9-1/2 in. by 5 ft.
3 in. It was painted on wood and transferred to canvas. It was ordered
by Leo X. as a gift to Francis I., and was presented to him by Lorenzo
de' Medici. The execution is by Giulio Romano, 1518. It is now in the
Louvre, Paris.

15. The Sistine Madonna, a canvas panel 8 ft. 8 in. by 6 ft. 5 in.,
was painted about 1515 for the high altar of the Church of St. Sixtus,
Piacenza, and received its name from the portrait figure of St. Sixtus
which it contains; it was purchased by the Elector of Saxony in
1753-1754 for the Dresden Gallery.


IV. COLLATERAL READINGS FROM LITERATURE.

In connection with St. Catherine:--

Latin Hymn, Vox Sonora Nostri Chori, St. Catherine's
Day. Translated by David Morgan.

Mrs. Jameson. Sacred and Legendary Art.

S. Baring-Gould. Lives of the Saints. Volume for
November.

In connection with St. Cecilia:--

S. Baring-Gould. Lives of the Saints. Volume for
November.

Mrs. Jameson. Sacred and Legendary Art.

Chaucer. Second Nonnes Tale.

Dryden. Alexander's Feast: Ode in honor of St. Cecilia's
Day.

In connection with Parnassus:--

Shelley. Hymn of Apollo.

Keats. Ode to Apollo.

Bulfinch. Age of Fable.

In connection with the Flight of Æneas:--

Virgil. Æneid, Book II. Translated by C. P. Cranch.

In connection with Socrates and Alcibiades:--

Fénelon. Lives of the Philosophers. Translated by
John Cormack.

Plato. Alcibiades, The Symposium, Protagoras. Translated
by Jowett.

Milton. Paradise Regained. Book IV. lines 240-285.

In connection with St. Michael and the Dragon:--
Milton. Paradise Lost. Book VI.

In connection with the Sistine Madonna:--
Mrs. Jameson. Sacred and Legendary Art (for St.
Barbara).


V. OUTLINE TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS IN RAPHAEL'S LIFE.

1483. Raphael born at Urbino.

1499. Raphael enters Perugino's studio at Perugia.

1504. "The Marriage of the Virgin."

1504. Raphael's first visit to Florence.

1505. Raphael in Perugia:--
The Madonna of St. Anthony.
The fresco of San Severo.

1506. Visit at Urbino:--
Raphael's portrait by himself.

1504-1508. The Florentine Period:--
Granduca Madonna.
Tempi Madonna.
Madonna in the Meadow.
The Madonna del Cardellino.
The Belle Jardiniere.
The Canigiani Madonna.

1508. Raphael called to Rome by Pope Julius II.

1511. Raphael frescoes the Camera della Segnatura.

1512. Raphael begins decoration of the Camera d' Eliodoro.

1513. Raphael commissioned by Leo X. to continue work begun
under Julius II.

1514. "Galatea."

1514. Raphael appointed architect of St. Peter's by Leo X.

1508-1515. Some Madonnas of the Roman Period:--Foligno
Madonna.

Garvagh Madonna.
The Madonna of Casa Alba.
The Madonna of the Chair.
The Sistine Madonna.

1515. Camera dell' Incendio completed under Raphael's direction.

1515-1516. Cartoons for tapestries executed under Raphael's
direction.

1517. Farnesina frescoes painted under Raphael's direction.

1519. The Transfiguration.

1520. Raphael died in Rome.


VI. SOME FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES OF RAPHAEL.

IN ITALY.

Rulers:--

Lorenzo de' Medici (reigned 1469-1492) and Pietro de' Medici
(1492-1494), dukes of Florence.

Giovanni Galeazzo Sforza (reigned 1476-1494), Lodovico Maria
Sforza (1494-1500), and Massimiliano Sforza (1512-1515),
dukes of Milan.

Francesco Maria della Rovere, duke of Urbino (born 1490;
died 1535).

Ferdinand I. (reigned 1458-1494), Ferdinand II. (reigned
1495-1496), and Ferdinand III., kings of Naples, the last
being he who was also king of Spain as Ferdinand V.

Innocent VIII. (1484-1492), Alexander VI. (1492-1503),
Pius III. (1503), Julius II. (1503-1513), and Leo X. (1513-1523),
popes.

Painters:--

Older group:--

Perugino (1446-1523).
Bazzi (1477-1549).
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519).
Bartolommeo (1475-1517).
Giorgione (1477-1510).
Titian (1477-1576).
Giovanni Bellini (1428-1516).

Compeers:--

Andrea del Sarto (1486-1531).
Sebastian del Piombo (1485-1547).
Assistants and Pupils:--
Giulio Romano (1492-1546).
Giovanni da Udine (1487-1564).
Francesco Penni (1488-1528).
Marc Antonio (1487-1539), engraver.
Michelangelo (1474-1564), sculptor.
Bramante (1444-1514), architect of St. Peter's.
Sanazzaro Jacopo (1458-1530 or 1532), poet (De Partu Virginia).
Ariosto (1474-1533), poet (Orlando Furioso).
Francesco Berni (1496-1536), comic poet.
Cardinal Bembi (1470-1547), celebrated scholar.
Count Baldasarre Castiglione (1478-1529), writer and patron of literature.
Christopher Columbus (1436 or 1446-1506), discoverer.

IN PORTUGAL.
Vasco da Gama (died 1525), discoverer.

IN ENGLAND.
Richard III. (1483-1485), Henry VII. (1485-1509), Henry
VIII. (1509-1547), kings.
Sebastian Cabot (1477-15?), discoverer.

IN GERMANY.
Frederick III. (1440-1493), emperor of Austria, and
    Maximilian I. (1493-1519).
Martin Luther (1483-1546), religious reformer.
Albert Dürer (1471-1528), painter.
Holbein (1498-1543), painter.
Copernicus (1473-1545), astronomer.

IN FRANCE.
Charles VIII. (1483-1498), king.
Rabelais (1483 or 1495-1553), satirist.

IN SPAIN.
Ferdinand (died 1516) and Isabella (died 1504), king and
queen, beginning to reign in 1474.




I

THE MADONNA OF THE CHAIR


In early days an Italian in addressing a lady used the word Madonna,
which, like the French word Madame, means My Lady. Now he says
Signora; Madonna would have to him an old-fashioned sound. To the rest
of the world this word Madonna has come to be applied almost wholly to
the Virgin Mary, with or without the child Jesus; and as Raphael
painted a great many pictures of the Madonna for churches or other
sacred places, a name has been given to each, drawn usually from some
circumstance about it.

The Madonna of the Chair is so called because in this picture the
Virgin is seated. She is sitting in a low chair, holding her child on
her knee, and encircling him with her arms. Her head is laid tenderly
against the child's, and she looks out of the picture with a tranquil,
happy sense of motherly love.

The child has the rounded limbs and playful action of the feet of a
healthy, warm-blooded infant, and he nestles into his mother's embrace
as snugly as a young bird in its nest. But as he leans against the
mother's bosom and follows her gaze, there is a serious and even grand
expression in his eyes which Raphael and other painters always sought
to give to the child Jesus to mark the difference between him and
common children.

By the side of the Madonna is the child who is to grow up as St. John
the Baptist. He carries a reed cross, as if to herald the death of the
Saviour; his hands are clasped in prayer, and though the other two
look out of the picture at us, he fixes his steadfast look on the
child, in ardent worship.

Around each of the heads is very faintly seen a nimbus, as it is
called; that is, the old painters were wont to distinguish sacred
persons by a circle about the head. Sometimes, as here, the circle is
a golden line only; sometimes it is a gold band almost like a plate
against which the head is set. This circular form took the name Nimbus
from the Latin word for a cloud, as if the heads of sacred persons
were in an unearthly surrounding. It is also called a halo. Such a
representation is a symbol or sign to indicate those higher and more
mysterious qualities which are beyond the artist's power to portray.

This simple composition is a perfect round, and if one studies it
attentively one will see how curved and flowing are all the lines
within the circle; even the back of the chair, though perpendicular,
swells and curves into roundness. It is by such simple means as this
that the painter gives pleasure to the eye. The harmony of the lines
of the composition makes a perfect expression of the peaceful group
centred thus about the divine child.

[Illustration: MADONNA OF THE CHAIR
Pitti Gallery, Florence]

It is a home scene and one such as Raphael might have seen in Rome
in his own time. Not unlikely he saw a mother enfolding her child thus
when he was taking a walk at the quiet end of day, and caught at once
a suggestion from the scene for a Madonna. There is indeed an old
legend which grew up about this picture, relating the supposed
circumstances under which Raphael found a charming family group which
served him as a model, and which he rapidly sketched upon the head of
a cask; the circular form of the picture is thus accounted for.
Whether or not this pretty story is true, it is certain that the
Madonna of the Chair is a true picture of home life either in
Raphael's time or even in our own day. The mother wears a handkerchief
of many colors over her shoulders, and another on her head like the
Roman scarf one still sees nowadays.

We may see what delight and reverence Madonna pictures like this have
awakened as we read the words of an old chant. In quaint diction and
with fanciful imagery the writer tried to express his feelings in the
presence of a painting which, if not this veritable Madonna of the
Chair, was certainly very like it.

    "When I view the mother holding
      In her arms the heavenly boy,
    Thousand blissful thoughts unfolding
      Melt my heart with sweetest joy.

    "As the sun his radiance flinging
      Shines upon the bright expanse,
    So the child to Mary clinging
      Doth her gentle heart entrance.

    "See the Virgin Mother beaming!
      Jesus by her arms embraced,
    Dew on softest roses gleaming,
      Violet with lily chaste!

    "Each round other fondly twining.
      Pour the shafts of mutual love,
    Thick as flowers in meadow shining,
      Countless as the stars above.

    "Oh, may one such arrow glowing,
      Sweetest Child, which thou dost dart
    Thro' thy mother's bosom going,
      Blessed Jesus, pierce my heart."




II

ABRAHAM AND THE THREE ANGELS


In the story of Abraham, as related in our Bible, we read of the
wandering and adventurous life of the patriarch as he moved from place
to place. In process of time he became "very rich in cattle, in
silver, and in gold." He was as brave as he was industrious. When Lot,
his brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, was taken captive by some
foreign kings who had conquered the king of Sodom, Abraham armed his
large company of servants and went to the rescue. He recovered not
only his nephew, but all the booty which the victors had taken.
Moreover, Abraham was a man of vision as well as of action, a man who
feared God and sought righteousness.

In his old age he was living with his aged wife Sarah on the plains of
Mamre. "He sat in the tent door in the heat of the day," the story
goes on,[1] "and he lifted up his eyes and looked, and lo, three men
stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent
door, and bowed himself toward the ground, and said, 'My Lord, if now
I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy
servant: let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your
feet, and rest yourselves under the tree: and I will fetch a morsel of
bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for
therefore are ye come to your servant.' And they said, 'So do, as thou
hast said.'

[Footnote 1: Genesis, chapter xviii., verses 1-8.]

"And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, 'Make ready
quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the
hearth.' And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and
good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it. And he
took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it
before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat."

In the picture we see Abraham welcoming his strange visitors in front
of his simple dwelling-place. He is dressed in Oriental robes and bows
himself to the ground after the custom of the Eastern people, who are
noted for their courtesy. He offers hospitality not as a favor to his
guests, but as a privilege which he craves from them. His, not theirs,
is the honor, he seems to say.

The three angels have a mysterious air. They are in human form, and
yet they are unlike ordinary visitors. Their attitudes, the flowing of
the robes, their gestures, all denote something unusual. While the
three stand with outstretched hands as if encouraging and blessing
their host, Sarah peeps through the open door and listens to the talk.
A country landscape, such as may be seen in the vineyards of Italy,
stretches away in the distance. Raphael never traveled outside his own
country, and painted only such landscapes as were familiar to him.

[Illustration: ABRAHAM AND THE THREE ANGELS
Vatican Palace, Rome]

The picture was intended as an illustration of the Bible. In the days
when Raphael was painting, though the art of printing had been
invented, only scholars and learned men could read books, and those
which were printed were rarely in the language which the people spoke.
Men and women did indeed hear stories read out of the Bible, but they
knew these stories chiefly from paintings, and from carvings in wood
and stone. Churches and monasteries, palaces and public halls, were
adorned with fresco paintings, and these storied walls formed the
people's literature.

Now the Pope, Leo the Tenth, employed Raphael to decorate parts of the
Vatican. The Vatican was the palace of the Popes in Rome, and one of
the open courts of the palace had a gallery or Loggia, as it is
called, built about its three sides. Raphael caused to be painted on
the walls of this gallery festoons of flowers and fruit and sometimes
animals, all surrounded and entwined with graceful ornaments. But it
was the vaulted ceiling of the gallery that he treated with the
greatest care. He made a great series of pictures from scenes in the
Old Testament, and some from the New, and his pupils painted these
upon the ceiling, so that it came to be known popularly as "Raphael's
Bible."

The ceiling is not flat, and it does not stretch without break, but
the gallery is like a succession of arched porches, and the ceiling of
each is divided into panels, sloping in four directions, with a flat
panel in the centre. These panels are filled with charming pictures
which you can see by standing with your head thrown back.

Raphael's Bible begins with the creation of the world; then follow the
history of Adam and Eve, and Noah and the deluge; in the fourth
section is the story of Abraham told in four compositions. Thus,
besides this picture of Abraham and the Three Angels, there is the
scene where Lot and his family are fleeing from Sodom, and his wife is
turned into a pillar of salt. There is also the meeting of Abraham and
Melchisedec (after Abraham's rescue of Lot), and a picture of God
promising a long line of descendants to Abraham.

In this open gallery the people of Rome could walk and read the Bible
in a succession of pictures. Since these and similar pictures and
statues and carvings were everywhere, men, women, and children read
them as they would read books, and a popular painter was like a
popular story-teller nowadays.




III

THE MIRACULOUS DRAUGHT OF FISHES


Another of the Bible scenes which Raphael painted was one which is
told in the New Testament concerning the Lord Jesus and his Apostles.
Some of these, as Peter and Andrew, James and John, were fishermen who
lived near the lake of Gennesaret in Galilee, and had spent most of
their lives in their boats. They had been much with their Master, and
sometimes left their boats to go with him through the country, when he
talked with them and healed the sick, and told the glad tidings, for
that is what the word Gospel means. One day he had been using Simon
Peter's boat as a sort of pulpit from which to speak to the people on
the shore.

     "Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, 'Launch
     out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught,'
     And Simon answering said unto him, 'Master, we have toiled
     all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy
     word I will let down the net.' And when they had this done,
     they inclosed a great multitude of fishes: and their net
     brake. And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in
     the other ship, that they should come and help them. And
     they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to
     sink.

     "When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus's knees,
     saying, 'Depart from me: for I am a sinful man, O Lord.' For
     he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the
     draught of the fishes which they had taken; and so was also
     James and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners
     with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, 'Fear not: from
     henceforth thou shalt catch men.'"[2]

[Footnote 2: Luke, chapter v., verses 4-10.]

In the picture we see the two boats laden with fish, one containing
Jesus with Peter and Andrew, and the other containing the partners
hauling in the net. The lake stretches away in the distance until it
seems to meet the sky in a line of light at the horizon. On the
opposite shore are the people to whom Jesus was speaking before the
fishermen launched out. Others on the bank are watching to get some of
the fish which are not hauled in. There is a boat over there just
pushing off. Fishhawks hover overhead, and on the nearer shore are
herons.

Just as before in the Madonna of the Chair we saw how all the lines in
the picture were drawn as it were in a circle, so here it is the long
horizontal line on which the picture is built: the boats extending
across the foreground, the distant shore, and the horizon line
swelling into the upland. Some one has said that the boats are so
placed that it looks as if the figures were slowly passing before the
eye of the spectator.

[Illustration: THE MIRACULOUS DRAUGHT OF FISHES
South Kensington Museum, London]

Now this picture is not, like so many, painted on canvas or on wood.
Raphael was bidden to make designs for some great hangings or
tapestries for the chapel in the Vatican palace known as the Sistine
Chapel. He made his drawings, cartoons they are called, on a coarse
kind of paper, the pieces put together on a great frame, and these
cartoons were sent to Arras in Flanders, where they were copied in
tapestry by skillful artists.

Raphael intended to represent scenes in the lives of the Apostles, and
his series was in two groups of five each, the first centring about
the life of St. Peter, the second about the life of St. Paul. The
tapestries are in the Vatican palace, but seven of the cartoons are in
the South Kensington Museum in London. There they are kept with great
care, but they have led a perilous life. When they were sent to Arras,
they were cut in strips for the convenience of the weavers, and
pricked with holes. Then after they had been copied in the tapestries,
they were thrown aside, as so much waste paper, and lay in a cellar,
neglected, for a hundred years. Fortunately they were not destroyed,
and the fragments were found in 1630, by the great Flemish painter
Rubens, who knew their value. He advised King Charles I. of England to
buy them, and they were still regarded as patterns for tapestries. The
king set up a manufactory at Mortlake, and some tapestries were made
from these cartoons.

When the king was put to death, Cromwell bought the cartoons, and put
them away in some boxes at Whitehall. When Charles II. came to the
throne, he tried to sell them to France, but was stopped, and finally
they found a home at Hampton Court Palace. A few years ago they were
removed to their present place of keeping.

The original tapestries, as we have said, were designed for the
Sistine Chapel, but they were long ago removed from that place and are
now preserved in the Gallery of Tapestries in the Vatican.

The colors of the tapestries have faded, but color never formed the
chief attraction of these compositions. What one always admired, and
can still admire in engravings and other copies, is what we call the
dramatic character of the picture, the way in which the painter has so
arranged his figures as to make them tell a story in a lively, graphic
fashion.

He can also, as his eye is more and more trained, discover the beauty
which lies in the drawing of forms, in masses and in lines. For an
engraving or a pencil drawing in and white can give a great deal
of pleasure, and some painters make better pictures with pen and ink
than they can with a paint-box and brushes.




IV

THE SACRIFICE AT LYSTRA


The Sacrifice at Lystra was another of the great tapestries, and was
in the second series of five which had to do with the life of St. Paul
as recorded in the Acts of the Apostles. The apostle was on a journey
with his companion Barnabas, and they were teaching and healing as
they went. At Lystra they had performed a wonderful cure in healing a
man who had been a cripple from his birth.

     "And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up
     their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, 'The gods
     are come down to us in the likeness of men,' And they called
     Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the
     chief speaker.

     "Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city,
     brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have
     done sacrifice with the people. Which, when the apostles,
     Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and
     ran in among the people, crying out, and saying, 'Sirs, why
     do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with
     you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these
     vanities unto the living God.' ...

     "And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people,
     that they had not done sacrifice unto them."[3]

[Footnote 3: Acts of the Apostles, chapter xiv., verses 11-15, 18.]

In the picture we see the two apostles standing on a platform at the
left, by the steps of a temple, just as the crowd sweeps along from
the other side with two oxen in the midst of them. It was just such a
sacrificial procession as was formed on the days when they honored
their gods in the temples. Paul and Barnabas receive the demonstration
with dismay, the former rending his garments, and the latter clasping
his hands in perplexity.

In the tumult of many figures we pick out five principal persons. At
the right is the restored cripple whose recovery is the origin of the
excitement. His folded hands, raised in adoration, come against the
back of a youth who, quick to see the apostles' displeasure, reaches
out an arm to stay the sacrifice. His hand nearly touches the shoulder
of the sturdy priest in front, who is lifting his axe to deal the
deathblow to the sacrificial ox. The priest's up-raised hand is
brought near the elbow of Paul, behind whom stands his fellow apostle.
Thus there is a continuous chain extending across the picture to link
together those who make up the plot of the story. The most attractive
face in the company is that of the youth in the centre, eager and
handsome among the stolid countenances surrounding him. The apostles
themselves are presently to join him in his efforts to restrain the
people, but for the moment, single-handed among so many, he springs
forward fearlessly to oppose the purpose of the mob.

[Illustration: THE SACRIFICE AT LYSTRA
South Kensington Museum, London]

These five figures thus linked together carry the story, but how
abundantly the scene is enriched by the minor characters! There are
not a great many figures, and each head is seen perfectly, so that one
can count the actual number of persons present; but the first
impression made on the eye is of a hurrying, eager crowd. As one looks
more closely, he discovers particular persons who help to fill out the
story. There are two priestesses kneeling beside the ox that is to be
sacrificed. One figure, other than the cripple who has been healed, is
shown in the attitude of prayer. Perhaps the old man at the extreme
right is drawing aside the robe of the cripple, curious to see if
there are any signs of the miracle, or if that really was the leg
which was helpless.

The two children who stand by the altar, one playing the pipes, the
other with a book of music, are very characteristic of Raphael, who
loved thus to introduce a playful, innocent element. The singing child
has his eyes bent on the ram which is led up for sacrifice.

Raphael, like other illustrators of the Bible, does not always follow
exactly the text which he is to illustrate. The people called Barnabas
Jupiter, and Paul Mercury. This would seem to show that Barnabas was a
great, imposing figure, and Paul, according to tradition, was a small,
undersized man; but there is no such contrast to be seen here.

By a happy suggestion, the painter has placed in the background on a
pedestal a statue of Mercury. We know it by the winged staff which
Mercury is supposed to carry as a sign of his office of messenger of
the gods.

Raphael painted at a time when scholars and artists were enthusiastic
over the rediscovery of the literature and art of the ancient world.
Such a scene as this, therefore, appealed to him; for he could not
only depict a Biblical incident, but he could make his picture a study
of ancient life. The architecture, the altar, the figure of Mercury,
the wreath-bound heads, the sacrificial act itself, were all such as
he could imagine from ancient Greece. Indeed, the whole picture is
like a copy of an antique bas-relief; and in the original cartoon
there is, below the picture, a decorative border studied from antique
sculpture, and below that still an ornamental edge which was very
common in Greek work.

And yet, though Raphael thus made much of the Greek spirit in his
design, he was like all great painters of his day. He did not try
minutely to repeat Greek life as he imagined it. The men and women and
children were like those he was wont to see in Rome or Florence, or
Urbino, where he was born, and the headdresses were such as the women
of his time wore.




V

HELIODORUS DRIVEN FROM THE TEMPLE


In the Vatican palace there is one chamber in a series of chambers
decorated with Raphael's paintings which is called in Italian Stanza
d'Eliodoro, or the Heliodorus Room. The name is taken from the first
of the paintings which cover the walls of the room.

The story which Raphael told in this picture is taken from an incident
in the history of Jerusalem, which is related in one of the books of
the Apocrypha and in Josephus's History.

It was at a time when Jerusalem was a prosperous city, owing its good
government to the upright and honorable character of the high priest
Onias. Through his efforts a large fund of money and treasure had been
laid up for the relief of widows and orphans. This treasure was stored
in the sacred precincts of the temple and carefully guarded for the
uses for which it was intended.

Now it came about that a distant king heard of this valuable treasure
and set his heart upon it. He called his treasurer Heliodorus, and
straightway sent him to Jerusalem to bring back the treasure by fair
means or foul. Heliodorus was a bold man ready for his evil task.
Arriving at Jerusalem, he sought out Onias and made his demand,
which, as a matter of course, was promptly refused. Heliodorus then
prepared to take the treasure by force, and, accompanied by his men,
pushed into the temple amid the lamentations of the people and the
prayers of the priests. But just as the robbers had laid hands upon
the coveted treasure, a strange thing happened; and this is what the
old narrative relates:--

     "There appeared unto them a horse with a terrible rider upon
     him, and adorned with a very fair covering, and he ran
     fiercely and smote at Heliodorus with his forefeet, and it
     seemed that he that sat upon the horse had complete harness
     of gold.

     "Moreover, two other young men appeared before him, notable
     in strength, excellent in beauty, and comely in apparel, who
     stood by him on either side, and scourged him continually
     and gave him many sore stripes.

     "And Heliodorus fell suddenly unto the ground, and was
     compassed with great darkness."[4]

[Footnote 4: Maccabees, book ii., chapter iii., verses 25-27.]

[Illustration: HELIODORUS DRIVEN FROM THE TEMPLE
Vatican Palace, Rome]

In the picture the priests still kneel at the distant altar while the
temple treasures are being borne away in heavy chests and jars.
Meanwhile swift retribution overtakes the despoiler. In gallops the
mysterious gold-armored horseman, his prancing steed crushing the
prostrate Heliodorus under his forefeet. On rush the two celestial
avengers, springing through the air in great flying leaps. Their feet
do not touch the ground as, with outspread arms and wind-blown hair,
they bound lightly forward, raising their scourges to drive out the
enemy. Heliodorus vainly lifts his spear to save himself; his men are
panic-stricken; his plot is undone. And yet in all this the angelic
avengers do not touch one of the prostrate or falling figures. Even
the horse's hoofs are not planted on Heliodorus. The victory is not
won by force, but by the mysterious power of celestial spirits.

Here is the way this picture affected a lover of art who stood before
it: "The Scourging of Heliodorus is full of energy, power, and
movement. The horse and his rider are irresistible, and the scourging
youths, terrible as embodied lightning; mortal weapons and mortal
muscles are powerless as infancy before such supernatural energies.
Like flax before the flame--like leaves before the storm--the strong
man and his attendants are consumed and borne away."

There is an interesting contrast in this great picture, for while all
this terrible action is going on at one side, one sees in an opposite
part a group of women and children, looking on with astonishment and
alarm. Near by is a figure carried in a chair on the shoulders of
strong men. This figure is Pope Julius II, and the reason why Raphael
introduced him into the painting is as follows:--

Julius was a warlike Pope who had expelled the enemies of the church
from the Papal territories and enlarged the boundaries of these
territories. He was also a great patron of the arts. He called on
Raphael to make designs for this chamber which should represent the
miraculous deliverance of the church from her secular foes; and as he
was regarded as the chief instrument in the victory, Raphael made him
present at this Expulsion of Heliodorus.

Not only the walls of the Heliodorus Room are adorned with pictures,
but the ceiling also is covered with designs, illustrating four Old
Testament stories of divine promises to the patriarchs: The Promise of
God to Abraham of a numerous posterity,[5] The Sacrifice of Isaac,
Jacob's Dream, Moses and the Burning Bush.

[Footnote 5: Sometimes interpreted as God appearing to Noah.]

Probably Raphael, who had friends among the cardinals and other
learned men of Rome, consulted them as to the selection of subjects
for this room. One can trace the thought which binds them all
together. On the ceiling we have God's promises made to his people of
old, while the pictures on the walls show how the same watchful
Providence delivered the church in later years.




VI

THE LIBERATION OF PETER


On the wall below the design of Jacob's Dream, in the ceiling of this
same Heliodorus Room, is the Liberation of Peter, painted above and on
each side of a window. The story is taken from the Acts of the
Apostles, Herod the king, as the narrative says, "stretched forth his
hands to vex certain of the church. And he killed James the brother of
John with the sword. And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he
proceeded further to take Peter also." The story of the imprisonment
and liberation of Peter now follows:--

     "And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and
     delivered him to four quarternions of soldiers to keep him;
     intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.
     Peter therefore was kept in prison; but prayer was made
     without ceasing of the church unto God for him.

     "And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night
     Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two
     chains; and the keepers before the door kept the prison. And
     behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light
     shined in the prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and
     raised him up, saying, 'Arise up quickly.' And his chains
     fell off from his hands. And the angel said unto him, 'Gird
     thyself, and bind on thy sandals.' And so he did. And he
     saith unto him, 'Cast thy garment about thee, and follow
     me.' And he went out, and followed him, and wist not that it
     was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a
     vision."[6]

[Footnote 6: Acts of the Apostles, chapter xii., verses 4-9.]

There is a succession of scenes in this story, and as the window runs
up into the wall, it gave Raphael an opportunity to distribute the
successive incidents in the three divisions thus formed. Over the
window, accordingly, is the scene of the awakening of Peter. The
angel, surrounded by a blaze of light, comes and smites the sleeping
apostle on the side, but his action also indicates that he raises him
and points to the door. Peter is shown bound by two chains, each
fastening him to one of the soldiers, who are both asleep at their
posts. The bars through which we see the scene are the prison bars.

At the right of the window, the angel is shown leading Peter past the
guards, who are asleep on the steps. The prison is indicated by the
thick wall and solid masonry, by the side of which the two figures are
passing. The soldiers by their attitude show how sound asleep they
are,--one stretched out at half length, trying to look as if he were
awake, the other with his head fallen forward, and his hands clasped
over his shield.

[Illustration: THE LIBERATION OF PETER
Vatican Palace, Rome]

In both of these scenes, the apostle is marked by the sign of the
nimbus, which we saw in the first picture, the Madonna of the
Chair. But if you look narrowly, you will see that Raphael has added
that other sign by which Peter is distinguished. He carries a great
key. The reason is to be found in the words of our Lord to him as
recorded in the Gospel of Matthew, the sixteenth chapter and
nineteenth verse. The key is a most fitting symbol here, for it seems
to imply that the apostle is himself opening the gates of his prison
house. The angel holds his hand, as an older person might lead a child
in the dark. Peter is too dazed to know what has really happened.

On the left is depicted the moment when the guards are awakened and
discover that their prisoner has escaped. It is an animated scene
illustrating the simple words of the gospel narrative: "Now as soon as
it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers, what was
become of Peter." A man with a torch tells by his gesture that
something extraordinary has happened, and the one whom he arouses
shows by his face and his uplifted hand how startled he is; the light
from the torch is too dazzling for another just awakened, and the last
of all appears to be the one whom we saw asleep over his shield.

Even in this very inadequate copy of a great painting, we can see what
is the noblest and most pervading beauty. It is the treatment of
light. The angel appears in the compartment over the window in a blaze
of light, and this light illuminates all the other figures. So it is
in the right-hand division, and Peter especially shows it, for the
side away from the angel is scarcely to be made out in the gloom. In
the left-hand division, the torch, the moon struggling through the
clouds, and the breaking of the dawn diffuse a light over the whole
scene.

It is as if Raphael meant to make it clear that the supernatural light
from the angel was brighter and more intense than the light which
falls from natural means. Thus the Liberation of Peter, like the
Expulsion of Heliodorus, keeps in mind the power of the divine over
the human. Some have thought, besides, that Raphael had in his thought
the recent delivery from captivity of Leo X., the Pope who succeeded
Pope Julius II., for the decoration of the Heliodorus Room was done
successively under these two popes.




VII

THE HOLY FAMILY OF FRANCIS I


There are a great many pictures by the old masters representing what
is known as the Holy Family. This is a group consisting of the mother
and child, with one or more additional figures. The third figure is
sometimes the infant John the Baptist, or it may be Joseph the husband
of Mary; a fourth figure is likely to be St. Elizabeth, the mother of
John the Baptist, and sometimes all five of these are shown in a
group.

That is the case with the painting of The Holy Family by Raphael,
which is now in the Louvre gallery in Paris, and is called The Holy
Family of Francis the First, because Raphael painted the picture for
that king of France. It is not difficult to make out the several
figures, for the painter has followed the natural order.

The light falls chiefly on the child Jesus, who is springing up, as
Mary lifts him from his cradle. His happy, joyous face is raised with
a glad smile to the down-glancing mother. She has eyes only for him,
and into her face there has come a look of sweet gravity which helps
one to see that this is more than the play of a mother and child.

Eagerly reaching forward to the golden-haired Jesus is the swarthy
John the Baptist, his hands folded in the gesture of prayer, the cross
which he carries as the herald of Jesus leaning against his breast,
and a look of bright wonder in his face.

Leaning over and holding him is his mother, Elizabeth, whom the great
painters were wont to figure as an old woman, after the description of
her in the gospel as "well stricken in years." She also gazes down at
her child with a like expression of deep feeling, as if she always
carried about in her mind the wonderful scenes which attended his
birth.

Behind the group is Joseph, the husband of Mary, in an attitude which
is very common in the old pictures. He rarely seems to be a part of
the group. He stands a little way off looking on, with a thoughtful
air, as if he were the guardian of this pair. Sometimes he is shown
with a staff or crutch, and it may be that here he rests his elbow on
it, while his head leans upon his half-closed hand.

All these are distinguished by the nimbus which encircles the head of
a sacred person, but the two other figures in the picture have no
nimbus, for they are angels, as may be seen by the outstretched wing
of one of them, and by the pure unearthly expression on their faces.
One of these angels strews flowers over the child; the other, with
hands crossed on the breast, is rapt in adoration.

[Illustration: THE HOLY FAMILY OF FRANCIS I.
The Louvre, Paris]

There is an opening which shows the sky, and it almost seems as if the
angels with crossed hands were listening to some divine melody that
came in with the angelic visitors. The whole scene is bathed in
light, and the longer we look the more we see the beauty of the lines
which flow in the picture as if to some heavenly music. All is action
save in the grave, contemplative figure of Joseph; and his serious,
resting attitude by its contrast makes more evident the leaping child,
the mother half stooping to lift him, John the Baptist pressing
forward and Elizabeth gently restraining him, with the two flying,
radiant angels.

The power which a great painting has over us often makes us ask, How
did the painter do this? did he think of everything beforehand? did he
paint the picture bit by bit, or did he rapidly sketch it all as he
meant to have it, and then at leisure fill in the parts, and add this
or that?

We know something of how painters work, and of the labor which they
sometimes put into their pictures, rubbing out and painting over. A
great master like Raphael always gives a sense of ease to his work, as
though it cost him nothing. But we know also that he took the greatest
pains as he took the greatest delight in his work.

It happens that there exist drawings made by Raphael when he was
preparing to paint this very picture, and it is interesting to see how
he went to work. He has a young woman in his studio take just the
attitude which a mother would take who was about to lift her child.
That he may be sure to draw the form correctly, he has her dress not
fall below her knee, and she has bare arms. In this way he will know
just how the arm and the knee will bend, and how the muscles will
show. Then he makes another drawing with the dress falling to the
ground, but with the arm bare. Finally he draws the arm with the
sleeve over it.

It was by such studies that he made sure of drawing correctly. They
are like exercises in grammar. But when he came to paint his picture,
he had not to think much about the correctness of his drawing; his
whole mind was intent upon making his peasant girl look as he imagined
the Virgin Mary to look.




VIII

ST. CATHERINE OF ALEXANDRIA


This is the legend of St. Catherine.

She was the daughter of King Costis and his wife Sabinella, who was
herself the daughter of the king of Egypt. When she came into the
world, a glory of light was seen to play around her head, and when she
was yet a little child, she gave such signs of wisdom that she was a
wonder to all about the court of Egypt. When she was no more than
fourteen years old, she was a marvel of learning. She could have
answered all the hard questions the Queen of Sheba asked Solomon, and
she knew her Plato by heart.

At this time her father died, and so Catherine became queen; but this
did not change her way of living. She read her books and shut herself
up in the palace to study. Now this did not please her nobles, and
they besought her to take a husband who should help her rule the
people, and who should lead them in war. At this the girl asked
them:--

"What manner of man is this that I must marry?" And one of the nobles
made answer:--

"Madam, you are our sovereign lady and queen, and all the world knows
that you have four notable gifts. First, you are come of the most
noble blood in the whole world; second, you have a great inheritance
in your kingdom; third, you surpass all persons living in knowledge;
and fourth, you are most beautiful. So, then, you must needs take a
husband that you may have an heir who shall be the comfort and joy of
your people."

"Is it indeed so?" said the young queen. "Then, if God has given me
such gifts, I am the more bound to love him and please him, and set
small store by my wisdom and beauty and riches and birth. He that
shall be my husband must also possess four notable gifts. He must be
of so noble blood, that all men shall worship him, and so great that I
shall never think I have made him king; so rich, that he will surpass
all others in riches; so full of beauty, that the angels of God will
desire to behold him; and so benign, that he will gladly forgive all
wrong done unto him. Find me such an one, and I will make him lord of
my heart."

Now there was a certain hermit who dwelt in the desert about two days'
journey from Alexandria, and the Virgin Mary appeared to him and bade
him go and tell Catherine to fear not, for she should have a heavenly
bridegroom, even her Son, who was greater than any monarch of the
world, being himself the King of Glory, and the Lord of all power.

[Illustration: ST. CATHERINE OF ALEXANDRIA
National Gallery, London]

Until now the young queen had been a heathen, but when the hermit
showed her a picture of the Lord Christ, she was so filled with wonder
and devotion that she forgot her books and her learning and could
think only of him. And thus it came about that she had a strange
dream, in which she dreamt that she was brought to the Lord, and he
said, "She is not fair or beautiful enough for me."

She woke in tears and sent for the hermit, who came and taught her the
Christian faith. She was baptized and her mother Sabinella with her.
Again she had a dream, and this time the Lord smiled on her, and put a
ring on her finger.

So now Catherine despised still more earthly pomp and riches, and
being thus plighted to a heavenly bridegroom, she refused more
steadfastly all the attempts of her nobles to persuade her to be
married. The good Sabinella sustained her in this, but at last died,
and Catherine was now left alone.

Then came the great emperor Maximin, who persecuted the Christians.
And he came to Alexandria and called the Christians together, and
commanded them, on pain of torment, to worship the heathen gods. When
Queen Catherine heard the uproar, she came forth of the palace and
stood before Maximin. She so used her learning, that she silenced the
emperor, and he could make no reply.

Thereupon he ordered fifty of his most famous wise men to dispute with
her. But she answered them so convincingly that they themselves became
Christians, and Maximin was in such a rage that he burned them to
death, yet they did not flinch.

Then did the emperor drag Catherine from her palace and cast her into
a dungeon. But the faithful queen prayed, and angels came and
ministered to her. At the end of twelve days the empress came to
visit her, and found the dungeon filled with light and fragrant with
sweet odors. So she and two hundred of her attendants fell down at the
feet of Catherine and declared themselves Christians.

When Maximin found what had taken place he was filled with fury, and
put to death the empress and all the converts. But he was so overcome
with the beauty of Catherine that he offered to make her empress if
she would forsake Christ.

When Catherine exclaimed: "Shall I forsake my glorious heavenly
bridegroom to unite myself with thee, who art base-born, wicked, and
deformed?" Then Maximin bade his men make four wheels, armed with
sharp points and blades, two turning in one direction, two in another,
so that the tender body of the beautiful queen should be torn asunder.

So they bound her between the wheels, and at the same moment fire came
down from heaven, and the destroying angel broke the wheels in pieces,
which flew off and killed the executioner.

Then Maximin, with his heart of stone, commanded that Catherine be
carried outside the city, and scourged and then beheaded. So it was
done; but when she was dead, angels bore her body over the desert and
over the Red Sea, and laid it away on the top of Mt. Sinai. As for the
tyrant, he was slain in battle, and the vultures devoured him.

In our picture of St. Catherine, and in others like it, she is shown
standing by a wheel. She leans upon it as if ready for martyrdom, and
looks upward as if she saw the fire coming down from heaven.




IX

ST. CECILIA


The legend of St. Cecilia is not so tragic as that of St. Catherine.
According to the story, Cecilia was a beautiful young girl who
belonged to a noble Roman family of the third century.

Her parents were Christians in secret, and they brought her up in the
faith. She was a most devout scholar. Night and day she carried about
with her a roll containing the Gospel, hidden within her robe. She
excelled in music, and turned her good gift to the glory of God; for
she composed hymns which she sang with such sweetness, that it was
said the very angels descended from heaven to join their voices with
hers.

Not only did she sing, but she played also on all instruments; but she
could find none which satisfied her desire to breathe forth the
harmony which dwelt within her, and so she invented a new one, the
forerunner of the organ, and she consecrated it to the service of God.

St. Cecilia like St. Catherine was a martyr, but the executioner who
was to put her to death was so affected by her innocence that his hand
trembled, and the wounds he made did not immediately cause her death.
She lived for three days, and as the story says:--

     "She spent (these days) in prayers and exhortations to the
     converts, distributing to the poor all she possessed; and she
     called to her St. Urban, and desired that her house, in which she
     then lay dying, should be converted into a place of worship for
     the Christians. Thus, full of faith and charity, and singing with
     her sweet voice praises and hymns to the last moment, she died at
     the end of three days."

Very naturally, St. Cecilia was taken as the patron saint of
musicians, and is sometimes represented as seated at a modern organ.
In this picture she is shown holding in her hands an instrument of
reeds, which may be taken as the beginning of the organ of later days.

Her eyes are raised, and her head is upturned as she listens to the
choir of angels shown above in the clouds, their lips parted as they
sing from open books. She holds the instrument, but she is so intent
on the music she hears that it seems almost slipping from her hands.

Indeed, some of the tubes are already dropping out of their place; and
as the eye follows them, it rests upon a number of other musical
instruments lying on the ground,--the pipe, the violin, the
tambourine, castanets, and others. It is as if we were shown the
various instruments which she had set aside as not satisfying to her,
and at last were shown her organ itself falling to pieces and dropping
from her hands. So faint and imperfect, the painter seems to say, are
all these forms of earthly music when compared with the heavenly.

[Illustration: ST. CECILIA
Bologna Gallery]

St. Cecilia is here in a company of other saints, not indeed of her
day and generation, but chosen by Raphael to give expression to
various ideas and sentiments. St. Paul, the great apostle to the
Gentiles, stands in a thoughtful attitude, one hand carrying a scroll
and resting on the hilt of a sword; for in one of his epistles, he
speaks of "the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God." He is
listening, and at the same time looks down upon the instruments as if
he were thinking how his earthly words, too, were dull beside the
voice of the Spirit.

On the opposite side of the picture is Mary Magdalene. She holds the
pot of ointment with which she anointed the feet of Christ, and by the
movement of her feet she seems just to have come into the scene, and
looks out of the picture as if she were bidding us and all other
spectators look on the saint and listen to the angels. Perhaps the
artist, in choosing her for one of his figures, was mindful of the
words of the Lord, who praised her for bringing a precious gift,
without thinking of its worth, simply because she loved him, and
wished to show her devotion. So St. Cecilia poured out her music, the
richest gift she had, not thinking how she could turn it into money
and give it to the poor.

Next to St. Paul, behind him and St. Cecilia, stands the evangelist
St. John. Painters and scholars alike have always seen in this figure
the beloved disciple, the one who leaned on the Lord's breast at the
last supper, and they delight to show him as a young man of refined
and beautiful countenance. His hand, with the parted fingers, seems
to make a gesture bidding one listen, and his face has a look of
rapture. It was natural indeed that Raphael should thus have placed in
the company one whose gospel is full of feeling, the life of Christ
set to music as it were.

Finally, we have St. Augustine, one of the Fathers of the church,
standing in his priestly robe and holding a bishop's crook. He is
apparently exchanging glances with St. John. Perhaps he is designed to
show that the church makes much of music in its service.

If we could see the painting itself with its beautiful color, we
should see even more distinctly not only how Raphael thought out his
design, making his figures all have a harmonious relation to one
another, but how perfectly the composition, in its lines, its light
and color, expresses this musical harmony of heaven and earth.




X

THE TRANSFIGURATION


The Transfiguration is a picture divided into two parts. The lower
part is filled with more figures than the upper and contains more
action. On one side are nine of the disciples of Jesus; on the other
is a crowd of people in company with a father who brings his son to be
healed. He gives an account of his boy's sickness in these words:--

     "He is mine only child. And lo! a spirit taketh him, and he
     suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth
     again; and, bruising him, hardly departeth from him."[7]

[Footnote 7: Luke, chapter ix., verses 38, 39.]

The father calls upon the disciples, in the absence of Jesus, to heal
his son. In the company with him, we can make out two women kneeling
by the boy. We think it is the mother who supports him, and looks at
the disciples as she points to her son. How quiet and self-possessed
she is, in contrast to the poor fellow's violence as shown in his
position, and his distorted hands.

She is wholly devoted to him, and the mother shows in her face and
bearing. But the other kneeling woman, who may be his sister, carries
a different expression as she points to the boy. She looks toward the
disciples with a severe and scornful air, as if saying: "What! you
profess to heal the sick, and you can do nothing for this poor
sufferer!"

The figures in the background are crying aloud and stretching out
their arms for aid. One can count the persons, but it looks as if
there were a crowd behind that we do not see, all pressing forward.

On the other side of the picture are the disciples, all eager, with
heads bent forward, and each gesturing to express his meaning. One,
younger than the others, with his hand against his breast, looks at
the father with a pitying but helpless expression, as if he would
gladly help him if he only could. Another has an open book as though
he were trying to find some word of comfort. One is pointing out the
boy to his neighbor, and two in the background seem to be lost in
perplexity.

But, after all, though most of the disciples are thus intent, the eye
quickly notes the action of a figure near the centre, full of fire and
energy, who is pointing upward, away from the group, and calling upon
the father and the women to look that way. And the line of his arm
thrust out is continued by that of another disciple behind him, who
also points upward.

For these two have seen the Lord, and they are bidding the troubled
parents look the same way for help. There, above all this turmoil and
confusion, is a scene of dazzling light, of which they alone seem to
be aware.

[Illustration: THE TRANSFIGURATION
Vatican Gallery, Rome]

The upper part of the picture discloses the transfiguration of the
Saviour. As the evangelist tells us, he had taken Peter and James and
John with him, and had gone up into a mountain to pray.

     "And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was
     altered, and his raiment was white and glistering. And,
     behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and
     Elias, who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which
     he should accomplish at Jerusalem. But Peter and they that
     were with him were heavy with sleep; and when they were
     awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with
     him."[8]

[Footnote 8: Luke, chapter ix., verses 29-32.]

The scene shown is at the moment of the awaking of the three
disciples, one not daring to look up again, but bowing his head and
folding his hands in prayer. They are dazzled with the glory. This
glory is a cloud of brightness which envelops the three figures of
Christ, Moses, and Elijah, or as the Greeks called him, Elias. The
Saviour looks heavenward with rapture in his gaze.

On one side are seen two kneeling figures. They are said to stand for
the father and uncle of the Cardinal who ordered the picture from
Raphael. It was the fashion of the day thus to introduce a patron into
a painting, and Raphael has made them as obscure as he well could.

We must not look at this great picture as if it were a panorama, where
a succession of scenes is witnessed, or find fault with it because the
Bible says that the transfiguration took place on one day and the
scene below took place the next day, when Jesus and his disciples had
come down from the mountain. Nor is anything said in the Bible which
would lead us to suppose that Jesus and the prophets were raised above
the ground.

No; what Raphael intended was to draw a contrast between an earthly
scene of suffering and a heavenly scene of peace and serenity; and he
took two scenes which lie next each other in the scripture narrative.
That was his thought, and see how wonderfully he has expressed this
contrast throughout!

There is the dark confusion and helplessness and grief below; above is
a scene of light which is like a vision, and this vision two of the
disciples see; and as we have pointed out, a contrast is made evident
in various parts of the picture. Indeed, the painting is made up of
contrasts; and not the least noticeable is that of the solid mass
below, square shaped, and the light, pyramid-shaped composition above.

The Transfiguration was the last painting to which Raphael set his
brush, and it was still unfinished when he was suddenly stricken with
fever and died. As his body lay in state, in the hall where he had
been working, this great picture was hung at the head, and the people
who came in fell to weeping when they saw it.




XI

PARNASSUS


Raphael was but twenty-five years old when he was bidden adorn a room
in the Vatican palace, and he made the four walls answer to four
divisions in the ceiling, just as afterward in the Heliodorus room.
The four divisions in the ceiling were filled with four figures,
representing Theology, Poetry, Philosophy, and Justice. Beneath Poetry
was this large, full design of Parnassus.

[Illustration: PARNASSUS
Vatican Palace, Rome]

Parnassus, in the old Greek myth, was the mountain on which the muses
were wont to meet, and here Apollo had his chief seat. Here, in the
fancy of the ancients, the poets and historians and dramatists came to
draw inspiration. So Raphael has made a great company of gods and
goddesses, and ancient and modern poets.

By means of the accompanying diagram, all the figures in the
composition can be made out.

As it is an imaginary scene, Raphael was free to bring together poets
of different ages and countries, grouping them by the natural
association of one with another. In this mythic realm time and space
are as nothing, and the poets are united in the higher fellowship of
the inspired imagination.

[Illustration: KEY TO PARNASSUS
1. Apollo 2. Calliope 3. Polymnia 4. Clio 5. Erato 6. Terpsichore
7. Euterpe 8. Thalia 9. Urania 10. Melpomene 11. Unknown 12. Virgil
13. Homer 14. Dante 15. Scribe 16. Berni 17. Petrarch 18. Corinna
19. Alcæus 20. Sappho 21. Plautus 22. Terence 23. Ovid 24. Sannazzaro
25. Cornelius Gallus 26. Anacreon 27. Horace 28. Pindar]

It is interesting to note how the painter has brought them together.
Apollo, of course, as the god of poetry and music, occupies the
central position, seated beneath some laurel trees, near the sacred
fountain of Hippocrene, with the nine Muses circling about him. Apollo
is always spoken of as playing the lyre, but Raphael gives him a
violin, because the action in playing that instrument is so graceful.
Some think also he meant to pay a compliment to a famous violinist of
that day.

Calliope, the muse of epic poetry, rests for a moment the long trumpet
whose epic strains are wont to stir the courage of men. Polymnia, the
muse of sacred poetry, leans upon the lyre whose vibrant strings
thrill the gentler emotions of faith and love.

Blind old Homer advances chanting the adventures of the Greek heroes,
and an eager youth writes down the verses. Behind him are Virgil and
Dante, and Virgil seems to be calling on Dante to listen to Apollo.

Another group shows Pindar, a very aged figure, reciting his
impassioned odes to Horace and another poet, who listen with
admiration. Plautus and Terence, two writers of Latin comedy, walk
together in pleasant companionship.

It was not an easy matter to dispose of the many figures and groups in
a space cut into, as this wall is, by a window, but how free and how
natural is the arrangement! It was among the first great paintings
which Raphael executed in the Vatican, and the grace and harmony which
mark his later works are here shown.

The picture is interesting also as another illustration of the great
revival of learning which took place in Raphael's day. The old
literature of Greece and Rome had been rediscovered. For centuries it
had lain like a buried city, forgotten under the ignorance and the
fighting of the Middle Ages. Now it was brought to light, and the
recovered treasure was the common possession of Italy, not indeed so
much of the plain people as of the learned men and the artists.

Raphael, as an artist, took delight in the statues which had been
found, and the other signs of Greek and Roman art; but it is not to be
supposed that he would know Homer and Virgil and Horace and Pindar and
Sappho at first hand. He had, however, friends among the learned men,
who could tell him of the treasures of classic literature, and his
imagination was quick to seize this material and adapt it to artistic
purposes.

     NOTE.--The key to Parnassus on page 61 is based on the
     description of the painting in Cav. E. G. Massi's
     "Descrizione delle Gallerie di Pittura nel Pontificio
     Palazzo Vaticano," the authoritative guide-book to the
     Vatican. Miss Eliza Allen Starr, in her monograph on the
     frescoes of the Camera della Segnatura, called "The Three
     Keys," identifies some of the figures differently, following
     the authority of Dandolo's lectures. The "unknown" figure
     she calls Sordello.




XII

SOCRATES AND ALCIBIADES


In the same room which holds Parnassus, with Poetry above on the
ceiling, there is another wall painting by Raphael, which commonly
bears the name of The School of Athens, though that name was not
originally applied to it. In the ceiling above is a figure
representing Philosophy, and the picture below carries out the idea in
its presentation of an assembly of scholars.

Just as in Parnassus Raphael brought together as in a beautiful dream
the god of poetry, the nine muses, and famous poets of the ancient and
what was to him the modern world, so, in the School of Athens, he has
assembled a great company of philosophers, chiefly out of the famous
line of Greek scholars. In a general way he has divided the assembly
into two groups, one of men who devote themselves to pure thought, the
other of those who apply their thought to science, like geometry,
arithmetic, astronomy, and music.

There are more than fifty figures in this great painting. Raphael has
made it clear whom he meant to represent, in many cases. They were the
philosophers, whom his friends among the cardinals and learned men
were so enthusiastic about. But he has also gathered about these
teachers those who might be their pupils; they are in many cases young
Italians of his own day; indeed, he has even pictured himself coming
in with a fellow artist.

What interested him was to paint a great number of persons who should
show by their faces and their attitudes that they were busy, in an
animated way, over what was worth thinking about. He placed them in a
noble hall, with a domed recess at the end, such as a great architect
of his day might have built. He showed a noble colonnade of pillars,
and he placed in niches statues of the old Greek gods like Apollo and
Minerva, who would be supposed to take an interest in what was going
on.

The picture is so large and has so many figures that it would not be
easy to reproduce it here, and give a good idea of its various parts;
so a portion only is shown, depicting what is commonly known as the
group of Socrates and Alcibiades. Socrates can surely be
distinguished, for he had a singular face and head. Some have thought
the companion was not Alcibiades, but Xenophon.

It does not greatly matter. Each was his companion and pupil, when he
was living. Xenophon wrote a narrative of his master's life and death.
Alcibiades is often mentioned in the dialogues of Plato, who also has
preserved for us the great sayings of Socrates. Two or three men stand
about, listening to a discussion which Socrates is having with his
companion.

[Illustration: SOCRATES AND ALCIBIADES
Vatican Palace, Rome]

The chief interest centres in Socrates, who seems to be explaining
his principles, telling them off, one by one, on his fingers. In the
old accounts which we have of this philosopher, he is shown to have
been a man who had thought deeply about the most important things, but
used the plainest, most homely speech when he was trying to make his
meaning clear. His plain face and eccentric figure were a familiar
sight in the market places, where he used to linger, drawing young men
into conversation, by which he tried to show them the better things of
life.

Alcibiades was, as Socrates acknowledged, "the fairest and tallest of
the citizens;" he was also "among the noblest of them," and the nephew
of the powerful Athenian, Pericles. Moreover, he was rich, though this
was a smaller matter. All these things, however, had lifted Alcibiades
up; and with the vanity of youth, he was ambitious for a great
oratorical career, without having in reality any sufficient
preparation. It is at this juncture that he falls in with Socrates,
who begins to question him kindly about his plans. The young man
confesses his ambitions, and the philosopher innocently asks him where
and how he has made his preparatory studies. Alcibiades seems to think
that the ordinary subjects of oratory, such as questions of war and
peace, justice and injustice, need no special knowledge but that
learned of the people.

"I cannot say that I have a high opinion of your teachers," says the
shrewd old philosopher; "you know that knowledge is the first
qualification of any teacher?"

Alcibiades. Certainly.

Socrates. And if they know, they must agree together and not differ?

Alcibiades. Yes.

Socrates. And would you say that they knew the things about which
they differ?

Alcibiades. No.

Socrates. Then how can they teach them?

Alcibiades. They cannot.[9]

So little by little, as one question follows another, Alcibiades comes
to see that the popular knowledge upon which he depends is a very weak
and variable thing. He confesses at last his own folly, and declares
his resolution to devote himself to thoughtful study.

[Footnote 9: From Plato's dialogue, Alcibiades, Jowett's
translation.]




XIII

THE FLIGHT OF ÆNEAS


In the series of rooms in the Vatican palace, of which one contains
Parnassus, and another the Expulsion of Heliodorus and the Liberation
of Peter, there is a room, the first of the series, which is called
the Room of the Great Fire, because it contains a large picture of the
Conflagration in the Borgo.

The Borgo is that quarter of Rome where the Vatican stands, and in the
ninth century there was, one day, a great fire there. It was said that
the fire was put out by the Pope of that time, Leo IV., who stood in a
portico connected with the church of St. Peter, and made the sign of
the cross.

Raphael was bidden make a painting upon one wall of the room, which
should represent the scene, and in his characteristic fashion he made
it to be not merely a copy of what he might suppose the scene to have
been; he introduced a poetic element, which at once made the piece a
work of great imagination.

A poet, who was describing such an event, might use an illustration
from some other great historic fire. He might have said in effect: "In
this burning of the Borgo, men could have been seen carrying the aged
away on their shoulders, as when in ancient times Troy was burned,
and Æneas bore his father Anchises away from the falling timbers."

This is exactly what Raphael did in painting. In the background of the
picture is seen Pope Leo IV. with his clergy, in the portico of the
old church of St. Peter's. The Pope's hand is raised, making the sign
of the cross; on the steps of the church are the people who have fled
to it for refuge. On each side of the foreground are burning houses.
Men are busy putting out the fire, and women are bringing them water.
Other men and women and children are escaping from the flames, and
some are heroically saving the weak and helpless.

It is amongst these last that Raphael has placed the group called the
Flight of Æneas. The Trojan bears on his shoulders his father, the
old, blind Anchises. Behind is Creusa, the wife of Æneas, looking back
with terror upon the burning city, and by the side of Æneas is his
young son Iulus, looking up into his face with a trusting gaze.

[Illustration: THE FLIGHT OF ÆNEAS
Vatican Palace, Rome]

Some one of Raphael's friends had no doubt told him the story, or read
it to him out of Virgil's Æneid, which was one of the favorite books
in that day, when men were delighting in the recovery of the great
poetry of Greece and Rome. Here is a part of the story as told by
Virgil in the translation by C. P. Cranch:--

    "But when I reached my old paternal home,
    My father, whom I wished to bear away
    To the high mountains, and who first of all
    I sought, refused to lengthen out his life,
    And suffer exile, now that Troy was lost.
    'O ye,' he said, 'whose blood is full of life,
    Whose solid strength in youthful vigor stands,--
    Plan ye your flight! But if the heavenly powers
    Had destined me to live, they would have kept
    For me these seats. Enough, more than enough,
    That one destruction I have seen, and I
    Survive the captured city. Go ye then,
    Bidding this frame farewell--thus, lying thus
    Extended on the earth! I shall find death
    From some hand.'

           *       *       *       *       *

                        'O father, dost thou think
    That I can go and leave thee here alone?
    Comes such bad counsel from my father's lips?
    If't is the pleasure of the gods that naught
    From the whole city should be left, and this
    Is thy determined thought and wish, to add
    To perishing Troy thyself and all thy kin,--
    The gate lies open for that death desired.'"

So saying, Æneas calls for his arms, resolved to remain with Father
Anchises fighting the Greeks to the death. Thereupon Creusa his wife
begins to weep, begging him not to leave her and her little boy Iulus
to perish in the flames. In the midst of her lamentations a sacred
omen is given, in the appearance of lambent flames playing about the
head of Iulus. Anchises is convinced of the will of the gods.

    "'Now, now,' he cries, 'for us no more delay!
    I follow; and wherever ye may lead,
    Gods of my country, I will go! Guard ye
    My family, my little grandson guard.
    This augury is yours; and yours the power
    That watches Troy. And now, my son, I yield,
    Nor will refuse to go along with thee.'
    And now through all the city we can hear
    The roaring flames, which nearer roll their heat.
    'Come then, dear father! On my shoulders I
    Will bear thee, nor will think the task severe.
    Whatever lot awaits us, there shall be
    One danger and one safety for us both.
    Little Iulus my companion be;
    And at a distance let my wife observe
    Our footsteps.'

           *       *       *       *       *

                    This said, a tawny lion's skin
    On my broad shoulders and my stooping neck
    I throw, and take my burden. At my side
    Little Iulus links his hand in mine,
    Following his father with unequal steps.
    Behind us steps my wife. Through paths obscure
    We wend; and I, who but a moment since
    Dreaded no flying weapons of the Greeks,
    Nor dense battalions of the adverse hosts,
    Now start in terror at each rustling breeze,
    And every common sound, held in suspense
    With equal fears for those attending me,
    And for the burden that I bore along."




XIV

ST. MICHAEL SLAYING THE DRAGON


There are many legends about St. Michael, who is also represented as
the Archangel, or head of the whole company of angels, and most of
these legends spring from a few passages in the Bible, chiefly two.
One of these is in the Epistle of Jude, the ninth verse, where the
archangel Michael is alluded to as "contending with the Devil." The
other is in the Book of Revelation, beginning at the seventh verse of
the ninth chapter:--

    "And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought
    against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and
    prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in
    heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent
    called the Devil, and Satan which deceiveth the whole world;
    he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out
    with him."

The Book of Revelation is full of strange imagery; and ever since it
was written, men learned and unlearned have tried to turn its
impassioned verses into real historical scenes, past or to come. Above
all, this figure of a dragon, a monster part man, part brute, puzzled
people, and they have all sorts of explanations to make of it.

In our fairy tales we often hear of hobgoblins and dragons and like
fearful beings, and we think of them as make-believe creatures, and
sometimes are afraid of them, even though if we are questioned we say
we know they do not really exist. But in Raphael's day, dragons were
by no means unreal things to people. Some thought they had seen them,
and there were a great many persons who if they had not seen them
themselves were sure others had seen them.

In Raphael's day there were large tracts of the world, dark woods,
inaccessible mountains, which had hardly been explored at all, and
people fancied them haunted by strange men and stranger animals. As
more and more light is let into the world, these dark places
disappear, and we have come to know just what kinds of animals and men
there are everywhere. Yet still, we are not quite sure there may not
be singular beasts lurking out of sight, like the sea serpent for
example.

Now, the dragon in early days stood for what was ugly and terrible and
a hater of good. The Greeks believed there were dragons, and they had
many tales of how Hercules or this or that hero slew a dragon. To the
Christian of the Middle Ages the dragon stood at one end of the scale,
an archangel at the other; for as the dragon was all darkness and
hideousness, the archangel was all light and beauty and gloriousness.
It thrilled every one to think of the angel of light fighting with and
overcoming the beast of darkness; for every one knew that sort of
struggle was going on in the world, even in himself.

[Illustration: ST. MICHAEL SLAYING THE DRAGON
The Louvre, Paris]

Raphael's picture gives a fine contrast between the beautiful, strong,
young archangel and his ugly foe. St. Michael hovers in mid air as
light and graceful as a bird, while Satan squirms beneath his feet, a
loathsome creature scorched by the flames and sulphurous fumes, which
pour from the clefts of the rock.

In the artist's imagination both are spirits, and so both are winged;
for wings, which carry one through the air, naturally are symbols of
spiritual existence. But the wings of the archangel are the wings of
some great, glorious bird like the eagle, which soars upward toward
the sun; the wings of the dragon are more like the wings of a bat,
which flies only in darkness and clings to the roofs of caves.

After all, the first and last impression which we get from the picture
is the lightning-like movement of the archangel. He darts at the
dragon as if he had come from heaven with the swiftness of light, his
robe flying like the wind away from him, his wings not spread in
flight, but lifted in his poise, and his face bearing the serenity of
an assured victory as he lifts his spear for its final thrust.

The great English poet Milton has made use of this same subject in
"Paradise Lost." Here is a portion of the story in the sixth book,
lines 316-330:--

    "Together both, with next to almighty arm
    Uplifted imminent, one stroke they aimed
    That might determine, and not need repeat
    As not of power, at once; nor odds appeared
    In might or swift prevention.
    But the sword of Michael from the armory of God
    Was given him, tempered so that neither keen
    Nor solid might resist that edge: it met
    The sword of Satan, with steep force to smite
    Descending, and in half cut sheer; nor stayed
    But with swift wheel reverse, deep entering, shared
    All his right side.
    Then Satan first knew pain,
    And writhed him to and fro convolved; so sore
    The griding sword with discontinuous wound
    Passed through him."




XV

THE SISTINE MADONNA


As we turn to the picture, famous the world over as the Sistine
Madonna, we seem to be looking through a window opening into heaven.
Faint in the background, yet filling the whole space, is a cloud of
innumerable cherubs; out of this cloud, and enveloped by it, appear
the Mother and Child.

They are taking their way seemingly from heaven to earth. A curtain
has been drawn aside that we may see them, and two figures are on
either side, as if to await their passing, one gazing into their faces
while he points outward, the other also kneeling in devotion yet
looking intently down. The mother's robes are blown back by the wind
as she moves steadily forward.

Underneath is a parapet, as if this were indeed a window, and two
beautiful boy-angels lean upon it, adoration on their faces and rest
in their position, as if they were everlastingly praising, and were
the very embodiments of cheerful innocence.

It is worth while to look at this picture for a moment, without
thinking of its meaning, and indeed without paying much attention to
the beauty of the figures, just to see how this great painter has
managed the lines and masses of the work. In art, lines and masses
and color are not unlike what words and sentences and what we call
style are in literature. Even if a writer has good and beautiful
ideas, much of the pleasure we might derive is lost when the words are
ill chosen, the sentences are bungling, perhaps even ungrammatical,
and the whole expression is commonplace or confusing.

We cannot get any notion of Raphael's color from our little print, but
it is not difficult to trace the lines and to see something of the
effect of the masses, and of light and shade. The shape of the whole
is a combination of pyramids. When you see the great base of a pyramid
and observe how the sides taper upward, you are aware that nothing
could stand more securely and at the same time suggest lightness, by
the rising and receding of the sides.

Now here you see that lines drawn from the shoulders of the two
attendant figures would meet at the Virgin's head, as at the apex of a
pyramid. The curtains even help this effect, by being drawn aside in
such a way as to make these lines more evident.

In the lower half of the picture the lines in the draperies of the
kneeling saints taper to an imaginary point between the heads of the
cherubs, forming a second inverted pyramid or triangle. Thus the
composition is inclosed in a harmonious figure whose outlines suggest
what we call a diamond.

[Illustration: SISTINE MADONNA
Dresden Gallery]

Perhaps one reason why a triangular arrangement satisfies the eye,
lies in the simple fact that the most important and yet familiar
object in nature is thus arranged. Thus in this picture, the three
principal persons form the upper triangle, and the body of each person
repeats the figure,--that is, the head rises from the shoulders in
such a way that the lines inclosing them produce a triangle. Further,
in each face, the line formed by the eyes is connected by two
imaginary lines meeting at the mouth.

In the picture the central figure illustrates this very noticeably.
The arm of the Virgin forms by its position, along with the body of
the child, a base, from which two other lines rise, tapering to the
top of the head; the child's head lies right in the course of one of
these lines. Thus mother and child together form a single figure, the
two united in one.

But when we have studied this simple principle of composition, we go
back with delight to the picture itself for what it tells us: the deep
mystery of the mother's face, as if she were lifted above the ordinary
plane of human life; the blended loveliness of childhood with the
consciousness of a holy calling; the lowly devotion yet dignity of St.
Barbara; the grandeur and forgetfulness of self of the Pope, whose
triple crown rests on the parapet; the perpetual childhood of the
angelic figures.

The picture takes its name from the Pope, who had been canonized as
St. Sixtus. It was painted for the convent of St. Sixtus at Piacenza,
but early in the eighteenth century it was bought by the Elector of
Saxony, and now hangs in the gallery at Dresden. It is a pleasant
thing to know that when Frederick the Great bombarded Dresden, he
ordered his cannon to keep clear of the Picture Gallery. Napoleon,
too, though he took many pictures to Paris, did not take any from the
Dresden gallery.

When we compare the Sistine Madonna with the Madonna of the Chair, we
see what a wide variety of pictures there may be on the single subject
of the Mother and Child. The Madonna of the Chair is, as we have said,
a home scene, like a picture from real life. The Sistine Madonna is a
vision; the figures are lifted above the actual surroundings of earth
into a purely ideal and heavenly atmosphere. In the Madonna of the
Chair, the Mother and Child are all in all to each other, and what
attracts us most in the picture is the mother's love. In the other
picture both mother and boy seem to forget themselves in the thought
of some glorious service to others.




XVI

PORTRAIT OF RAPHAEL


We have been looking at fifteen pictures designed by Raphael. They are
but a few of the great number painted either wholly or in part by the
master, or painted by his pupils from designs and sketches made by
him. He was thirty-seven years old when he died, and it was said that
he died on his birthday. His life was brimful of activity as a
painter.

The portrait which stands at the beginning of this little book was
painted by himself at the age of twenty-three, for his mother's
brother, whom he was wont to call his "second father." An English
poet, Samuel Rogers, in his poem "Italy," has these lines which
describe it prettily:--

    "His heavenly face a mirror of his mind,
    His mind a temple for all lovely things
    To flock to and inhabit."

One of his contemporaries, Vasari, wrote a book of "Lives of the
Painters," and thus he speaks of Raphael: "All confessed the influence
of his sweet and gracious nature, which was so replete with
excellence, and so perfect in all the charities, that not only was he
honored by men, but even by the very animals, who would constantly
follow his steps, and always loved him."

If we think of what was happening to Raphael in the year 1506, when he
painted this portrait, perhaps we shall read more truthfully the
expression in his face. Seven years before he had entered the studio
of Perugino, and had begun to learn from that master and to show
something of his own power. Two years before he had made his first
visit to Florence, and there he saw some of the great pictures by
Leonardo da Vinci and Michael Angelo, and had a new conception of what
art could do.

He had already shown the effect upon him in some of his greatest
Madonnas, and he stood now on the threshold of a great career. New
ambitions awoke within him; new ideals flashed upon his inner vision.
Modest and gentle though he was, he felt a growing consciousness of
his own power.

So he holds his head high; not haughtily, but with a dignified
self-confidence. His eyes seem to see the visions of which he dreams;
his mouth is half parted as if in expectancy. Happy and lovable, there
is a sweet thoughtfulness in his air which gives promise of his
wonderful performance.


“Burglar! Banker-Father!” “A bag full of God,” someone “larger than God or the devil,” or perhaps “a dazzling meteor dropping down into the crib,” the father figure in American women’s poems looms large. Often a literally massive figure, he watches, many times in a sinister fashion from the shadows the speaker waits in. The history of American women’s poetry deals in the power that is the currency of patriarchy in multiple forms, but often the figure of authority that most closely exemplifies it is that of the domineering father. In a culture so often inscribed with religious meanings, particularly those of Christian origin, it is little surprise that often women poets use the trope of a daughter-speaker who considers the father to be God. What impact does the Father-God as subject have on American women’s poetry, and is there a progression of thought that moves historically through the verse? An inquiry into feminist theological examinations of God as the root of patriarchal culture in an American context can provide a context for understanding these themes.
Mary Daly’s Beyond God the Father is an impassioned indictment of the oppression and pain enacted by patriarchal religion, and it seems no small coincidence that the metaphor for God Daly chose to eviscerate was that of “Father.” The introduction of the tome introduces three steps towards dismantling this paradigm. First, Daly identifies “liberation” of language as the beginning act of rebellion by which more egalitarian philosophies can take hold. Gesturing toward the power of God to name, and his symbolic act of imbuing Adam with this same power (to name the animals and Eve herself in the Biblical Genesis account), Daly suggests that the power to name is one that must be taken back by women as a step of “liberation” (8). This self-definition, self-naming impulse is affirmed as an early and consistent phenomenon in poetry written by American women in Alicia Ostriker’s Stealing the Language (59). The second step of Daly’s methodology introduces the concept of the “castration” of language, that is, the need to castrate “the great God-father,” who is merely the highest means of expressing the continual “phallocentric value system imposed by patriarchy” (9-10). “Father God,” in Daly’s analysis, is “spawned in the human imagination and sustained as plausible by patriarchy,” and consequently has “rendered service to this [patriarchal] society by making its mechanisms for the oppression of women right and fitting” (13). The castration of language is a means of de-normalizing the Father-God, who stands in as the ultimate phallus, so as to wrest from his grip the language itself. Daly’s third imperative is an “exorcism,” by which women dislodge the pervasive psychic ills phallocentrism has imposed. 
    The father-subject of American women’s poetry seems to often take on the metaphor of God and play out with Daly’s progression to freedom. Whether God is envisioned as taking on the characteristics of the father, whether the father thinks of himself as God, whether the daughter-speaker merely fears that he may in fact be God, this trope appears continually. That is not to say that it is exclusive as a means of expressing the father or as a means of expressing God. Ostriker contends that “all images of logocentric male dominance in a patriarchal society lead back to God,” and invokes Milton and Protestantism to further drive home this point: “He for God only, she for God in him” (136-137). Ostriker includes many figures of “logocentric male dominance” in her analysis—not only fathers but also doctors, husbands, clergymen, politicians, lawmakers, etc. Yet the image of the father seems significant because he is perhaps the most immediate and first enactor of patriarchy in a daughter’s life, assuming he is present at all (and when he is not, his absence takes on an oppressive alienation of love and meaning). If the phallus is in fact the central symbol, the father is most significant to the daughter because she is his “creation.” Psychoanalysis seems to suggest that a child’s concept of God or the Divine is based in the father-child relationship, although the complications this may create in daughters is not fully explored (Rizzuto 32, 43). However, the women poets offer a brutally honest conversation about how the father-God complex plays out. The topic of the father as God in American women’s poetry can be argued to follow Daly’s progression, specifically originating with the sly liberation of Emily Dickinson’s poems, the enraged yet conflicted castration of Sylvia Plath and Anne Sexton, and finally the slowly emerging but triumphant exorcism of Sharon Olds.
    Women poets have suffered from a particular kind of creative scrutiny that reads their biographical meanings onto the meanings of their poems, but the ones previously mentioned have perhaps particularly been singled out. Emily Dickinson as a famously “reclusive spinster” whose imagined illnesses, mental ailments, and erratic behavior is superimposed on the analysis of her work, fair or otherwise. Sylvia Plath and Anne Sexton were considered to form the basis of a group of poets deemed “confessional” in nature, a term that was initially meant as derogatory. The reverberation of confessional poetry is broadly apparent in the trends and subjects of contemporary poetry, having opened the door to greater freedom and audacity in the artistic vehicle of the poem. Sharon Olds, born roughly a decade after Plath, 14 years after Sexton, was already observable as benefitting from their tradition of candor in her debut volume, Satan Says, published six years after Sexton died. Yet the characterization of a poem as “confessional” carries with it the baggage of biographical inference that is often a hindrance to true understanding. In the case of Plath and Sexton, the issue of incest, abuse, and trauma in their poems are often conflated with their tragic biographies. Both poets suffered from bouts with mental illness and tragically succumbed to suicide, Plath in 1963 and Sexton in 1974. Some of the scholarship on both poets seems to fall prey to essentializing their poetic narratives as though they were merely the receptacles for a death drive that managed to eke out some elegant description along the way. Obviously some elements of their work is personal and very real, but the analysis offered here will make very little effort to link biographical information to the fictive world of the poem. Reading the poet as the literal speaker inhabiting her every work limits the possibilities for seeing these works as part of a larger whole, and as the creative rendering of their writers, not merely exact replicas of experience. Both Plath and Sexton made it clear at various points in their literary literal sense. Plath offered an idea about the place of poems to relate a personal event to a larger reality (calling to mind the popular feminist saying that “the personal is political) as important, and therefore the symbology or events of her work may merely convey a larger, societally “relevant” theme. Sexton made similar claims, asserting that she did not limit herself to “the literal facts” of a lived experience to share them in a poem (Swiontkowski 10). Gale Swiontkowski offers an elegant means of dealing with these theoretical challenges when she posits that human experience is lived in “a symbolic realm of emotional interpretations,” giving the literary analyst a means of separating the biography from being superimposed too heavily on the art itself. Where this analysis will spring from theoretically must derive from a considered feminist critique and synthesis of postmodernist readings (particularly the French school of thought that might consider the author “dead,” inconsequential). Cheryl Walker offers one way to consider this: “My own brand of persona criticism assumes that to erase a woman poet as the author of her poems in favor of an abstract indeterminacy is an act of oppression. However, every version of the persona will be a mask of the author we cannot lightly remove” (571). This act of situating the woman poet in a patriarchal context while not dismissing that her persona is some permutation of masks and symbols that may or may not present reality is what this analysis will attempt to do.
    Emily Dickinson deals with God, father, and the Father-God sometimes playfully and sometimes with a dark wit, but her status as a poetic foremother of sorts makes her an ideal place to observe the trope at work. Dickinson acts as an originator for a great many impulses in American women’s poems, not the least of which was her work at revising theology and addressing God. Ostriker contends that Dickinson both “submits and defies. The patriarchal God of her Puritan forebears elicits from her not only awe but anger at his masculine distance and power. If at times she coyly plays his “little girl,” he is nevertheless the biblical bully…” (38). Dickinson indeed perceives God as being a kind of cruel and often unfair supreme authority, one who in an early poem (“I never lost as much but twice,”) she calls “Burglar! Banker-Father!” and before whom she stands as a “beggar,” after a loss that is believed by some critics to refer to a death in the family (lines 7, 3). Here she perceives God as both the burglar and the banker, the one who “giveth and taketh away” (as per the Biblical account, Job 1:21). Here the supplicant but angry daughter-speaker recalls the humiliating experience of being a “beggar” before God, and her liberatory voice seems to speak what might otherwise be too awful to contemplate—that the one who gives might take it back as though it were a game to play. It seems clear that the daughter-speaker in this poem condemns such activity. Another poem offers the possibility of a sinister reading in its lack of first line punctuation—“Far from love the Heavenly Father / Leads the chosen child” (“Far from love…” lines 1-2). The daughter-speaker observes the “Heavenly Father,” leading away “a chosen child,” perhaps to a place “far from love,” in a more standard reading. Yet the lack of punctuation also allows the reader to perhaps see the “Heavenly Father”’s leading as “far from love” characteristically, or that he himself is “far from love,” unlike the myriad views on him offered by the religious community of Dickinson’s time.
    Dickinson wrote a large number of poems that read God in varying roles and with varying characterizations, but perhaps the most salient point of “liberation” she made was to name the daughter-speaker as a self who is impacted in the making of the “Heavenly Father.” For the first time, the dynamic was observed in a more honest light from the vantage point of the daughter-speaker, and not just in a light of imagined perfect devotion, but a paradigm that told plainly the many psychic pains that this “Heavenly Father” seems to enact. Barbara Mossberg contends that Dickinson’s poems reveal God as a “superfather” who “fails on a cosmic scale” (113), and this is a revelation of a kind not “proper” for the time, especially for a “dutiful daughter” to reveal. One poem that seems to finally underscore this sensibility finds God as a mighty Father sitting at a table, unwilling to share. “Was God so economical? / His Table’s spread too high for Us-- / Unless we dine on tiptoe” (“Victory Comes Late,” lines 7-9). One can imagine the daughter-speaker standing on tip-toe to join the table, but God is too “economical” to feed the hungry who wait below. She later uses a bird metaphor to suggest that God—as an “Eagle”—has a “Golden Breakfast” which “strangles” mere “sparrows” (12-13). Merely a “sparrow,” perhaps the small daughter-speaker must starve rather than be strangled by the great hulking “Breakfast” of the “Eagle.” A more sinister reading might even suggest that the patriarch of the meal wishes the sparrows to starve, perhaps the better to keep them under the table and not flying into his face to challenge him. 
    Although Dickinson’s speakers said a number of subversive things about the God she finds to be a cruel bully and withholder, her “naming” of his many failings never enacts any violence or real challenge akin to the “castration of language” that Daly imagines. Barbara Mossberg imagines a reading of her poem “’Twas Love—not me—“ wherein the speaker believes God to be a senile father who has mistaken her for Christ and is therefore punishing her (132). This alliance with daughter-speaker as Christ will be repeated in Sexton and somewhat in Olds, but with vastly different results. While the daughter-speaker here accuses God the Father of his horrible mistake and first begs him to “punish—pray / … Just Him—not me—“ the poem still ends with a bracing of sorts that invites the punishment as perhaps deserved, closing with the ominous “Now Strike!” (lines 2-4, 12). Dickinson’s speaker may have named the unfairness of her lot, may even have called into question whether her “crucifixion” of sorts is fair, but in the end she submits to the authority. Later in the analysis a discussion of allying the daughter-speaker with Christ will be further performed, but considering Dickinson as a starting point for a thematic journey through American women’s poems, fast-forward to the tumult of the 1960s and the figure of Sylvia Plath.
    Sylvia Plath seems a natural entrance into the discussion of poems about fathers in American literature—her scathing “Daddy” is anthologized widely. Perhaps lesser-recognized is the progression her work takes untangling the “Father-God” from his most powerful and all-encompassing characterization in “Full Fathom Five,” to the eviscerating “devil” and “swastika” of “Daddy.” This progression is one recognized in Jahan Ramazani’s Poetry of Mourning: The Modern Elegy, wherein Plath and Sexton are seen as reinventing the family eulogy on behalf of their fathers. His vision of Plath’s deconstruction of the father-mythos is mostly accepted in this analysis, except for the chronological placement of “Electra on Azalea Path” in that order. Furthermore, while Ramazani primarily sees Plath’s speakers as entirely representational of Plath herself (and therefore views their suicidal tendencies as a Freudian internalized murderous impulse towards the father), this analysis is more interested in seeing the poems as representing a progressive daughter speaker or persona’s progression as part of a larger thematic movement towards the deconstruction of the father-subject in American women’s poems.
    Though Plath’s speakers eventually arrive at Mary Daly’s language “castration” in “Daddy,” they begin with a rather mystified and intimidated view of the inscrutable father in “Full Fathom Five.” The speaker could be Miranda, given that the title references The Tempest and we see the speaker “walk dry on [the father’s] kingdom’s border / Exiled to no good,” as though she has experienced an exile within an exile, being not only confined to the island but having fallen out of favor with Prospero, she is also confined to its margins (lines 41-42). The father-subject (perhaps Prospero) is more than a father, his hair is “The old myth of origins / Unimaginable” and he is to “be steered clear / Of, not fathomed” (10-11, 13-14). The father’s body is described as the landscape of the island itself, massive and unknowable, huge as god. We, the reader, see at the very end of the poem that the father “def[ies] other godhood,” solidifying his primacy as the ruler of not only the daughter’s landscape, but her as a person (40). This becomes horrifyingly, acutely clear when the end of the poem in the next stanza abruptly recalls a memory: “Your shelled bed I remember. / Father, this thick air is murderous. / I would breathe water.” (43-45). The incestuous tone of the final stanza predates the publication of Anne Sexton’s “Briar Rose,” but they are hauntingly similar. We see the father as an oppressive,ly-charged presence, smothering the daughter. It is notable that this is the first time the poem directly addresses the father-subject as a father, before he was the strange, distant god of the islands, but here he becomes the intimate oppressor. The daughter-speaker would rather breathe a fatal lung-full of water than the “murderous air” around her father’s “shelled bed,” an enclosure of death. 
    Following “Full Fathom Five,” Plath’s fathers devolve from god-figures into more mortal and knowable figures. In “Electra on Azalea Path,” the daughter-speaker visits the father’s grave and for a moment imagines herself “God-fathered into the world from my mother’s belly” (line 7). This God-conception would make her absolved from guilt or else free to die as self-sacrifice to escape it. Yet the admission that the father is not in fact, God himself but a mere mortal still proves not a conceit sufficient to wrest her from his grasp—upon the sight of his grave at the end of the poem, she believes that “It was my love that did us both to death,” hers a gruesome suicide: “My own blue razor rusting in my throat” (46, 43). The daughter might wish to believe she can deconstruct her father into the mere mortal he is, to grasp some true God-fathered-ness to shield her from his misdeeds, but she still in the end holds herself responsible for his death and her own. The deconstruction is incomplete. In “The Colossus,” we see the massive body of the distant father in “Full Fathom Five,” but he is mocked as a figure who is not in fact divine but only considers himself to be so—“Perhaps you consider yourself an oracle, / Mouthpiece of the dead, or of some god or other” the daughter-speaker contends (6-7). She counters this erroneous belief, pointing out that a whole “thirty years” of attempting to sort out the “silt” of his “throat” have made her “none the wiser” (9-10). He is not the mouthpiece of a god, or even God himself. He’s merely a massive figure who is “pithy and historical as the Roman Forum” (18). Yet the daughter is still trapped in his orbit. She must “squat” in his “left ear, out of the wind” and her sun “still rises under the pillar of [his] tongue” (24-25, 27). His deconstruction as one who does not speak as a medium for the divine does not lessen the impact he has on her. He may not be God, but his body is still the landscape she is forced to hide in, literally trapped by his words, under the (phallic suggestion abounding) “pillar” of his “tongue.” 
    In “Little Fugue” and finally, the sardonic “Daddy,” Plath’s daughter-speaker castrates the language of the father-God by attacking his authority ruthlessly. “Little Fugue” envisions the father as a “dark funnel,” and finally as a gruesome butcher, “lopping the sausages!” (22, 33). He is no longer God, but is seen for the awful dark mass that he has long been in the daughter-speaker’s life, representing the power of patriarchy in the immediate structure of her life. He is grotesque as a butcher, ironically “lopping” off the bloody sausages that endow him with phallic power to begin with. Finally, “Daddy” is the most explicit of Plath’s daughter-speakers. Here she truly castrates the huge God-father, openly announcing that she has to “kill” him, and that he is a “bag full of god” (merely a body holding the “marble-heavy” associations of Godhood), and later, “Not God, but a swastika / So black no sky could squeak through” (6, 8, 46-47). Here the furor reaches its most feverish point. The daughter-speaker completely castrates the language that has bound her to the father. The use of the affectionate “Daddy” underscores the violence in a mocking, sarcastic tone. The speaker envisions “Daddy” as the worst kind of evil imaginable in the historical context of Plath’s time—a Nazi. He’s also “a devil… who bit [her] pretty heart in two,” as horrific and unimaginable as a nightmare (54, 56). At the end of the poem we see the inversion of “Full Fathom Five” and the father’s “shelled bed.” Here the father is asked by the speaker to “lie back,” as she places “a stake in [his] fat black heart” (75-76). He is now violated, the stake a phallic symbol turned back onto him, and the admonition, “Daddy, you can lie back now” becomes sadistic rather than soothing. The castration of the Father-God is complete, but the reader is left with only the images of the villagers “stamping” on him, far from an image of balance and peace. The exorcism of the father’s psychic harm is nowhere to be found.
    In a similarly violent statement, “all the cocks of the world are God,” or so says the speaker in Anne Sexton’s “The Fury of Cocks,” an unabashed statement that is perhaps the strongest summary of the general feeling surrounding gendered power imbalance in her poems (line 30). Her speakers repeatedly resist the phallocentricity of the language, they repeatedly call attention to how the phallus is supremely powerful and supremely horrible. In “The Earth Falls Down,” Sexton’s speaker wonders who to blame (for pain, for “conditions”?) and considers: “Blame it on God perhaps?” but then decides, “No, I’ll blame it on Man / For Man is God / and man is eating the earth up / like a candy bar” (24-27). Her consideration that God is really just “Man” writ large calls to mind Freud’s question—did God create man in his image, or did man create God in his own? Sexton seems to draw back the curtain from the power structure and declare it is the later who is “eating the earth up / like a candy bar,” gobbling its resources like a greedy child. In “Is It True,” a spiritually-searching speaker concludes that “the men of God are God” (177). For Sexton, the phallocentric discourse of power is one that she repeatedly “exposes” and castrates with her acerbic wit.
    Figures of male authority in Sexton’s poems are many—doctors, fathers, and God himself—yet the image of God-as-father, father-as-God seems to be perhaps more closely paralleled than even Dickinson or Plath. Maxine Kumin offers a beautiful, insightful essay that serves as the introduction to The Complete Poems of Sexton and makes mention of her lifelong poetic exploration of “the father-daughter compact,” as well as her preoccupation with Protestant religion near the end of her life, a theme that dominates her last book, The Awful Rowing Toward God (xxx).  Kumin, who is a tour-de-force of poetic power in her own right, was perhaps Sexton’s closest friend and had a particularly intimate view into her creative process. It was Kumin’s belief, expressed in this essay, that the God of The Awful Rowing was “the one living and constant Daddy left to Sexton” (xxxii). Still, this father-God is one who beats her at poker by drawing from his mystical deck, and this last image is the resounding echo of a power-struggle that Sexton’s speakers wrestle mightily through her oeuvre. Clues to this father-God connection abound in her work, but one as of yet critically unexplored is the use of the “jellyfish” as a metaphor for both. In Sexton’s poem “Eleanor Boylan Talks to God,” the speaker observes her friend Eleanor Boylan talking to God in a casual way that seems irreverent and frightening. The speaker recollects her thoughts on God, offering that she thought “He had a face when I was six and a half,” but that “Now he is large, covering up the sky / like a great resting jellyfish” (lines 15-17). This seems an unusual image unless you recall that in her famous poem, “Briar Rose,” in which Sexton revises the Sleeping Beauty fairytale to include a princess who perhaps suffers from PTSD from her father’s incestuous assaults, we encounter the jellyfish in the form of the father. 
    Each night I am nailed into place
    and I forget who I am.    
    Daddy?
    That’s another kind of prison.
    It’s not the prince at all
    but my father
    drunkenly bent over my bed,
    circling the abyss like a shark,
    my father thick upon me
    like some sleeping jellyfish. (150-159)

The “nailing into place” recalls coercion and perhaps even crucifixion, an image Kumin addresses as one of many parts of Sexton’s personal iconography (xxx). But the father who is “thick upon” the daughter-speaker is uncomfortably like Plath’s father of the “shelled bed,” and again his presence is “thick,” although here like a “jellyfish” instead of just “air” as in Plath. The use of the jellyfish (uncommon as it is in the rest of Sexton’s work) in “Eleanor Boylan” and “Briar Rose” seems to beg the reading that the two oppress as one entity. Father-God is the jellyfish, menacing and poisonous, tentacle-d (a phallic suggestion Sexton no doubt chose with consideration). 
    The vague intimation at crucifixion in “Briar Rose” is explored thoroughly in Sexton’s many works, mostly The Jesus Papers, but the interest for the reading of God as Father, father as God in her poems leads one to see how the speakers of her poems identify themselves with Christ as a fellow sufferer. Diane Middlebrook affirms Sexton’s obsession with crucifixion imagery, contending that Sexton holds a “belief in an analogy between her suffering and that of Christ. In Sexton’s version of Christian theology, Christ’s death like her own deathwish, is meaningful to others as a source of symbolisms” (306). This trop appears in “Protestant Easter,” where an eight-year-old daughter-speaker sits in church and worries excessively about Jesus as though he were a boy about her age. She sympathizes with his plight—“Maybe Jesus was only getting his work done / and letting God blow him off the Cross” as though she understands suffering under a parental figure (15-16). Later she imagines that Jesus frequents a tunnel she once sat in, as though they are playmates (22-29). She worries that Christ “went up in smoke / like Daddy’s cigar,” yet again tying her concern for Christ back to a family dynamic of her own (31-32). Finally she contemplates herself and Jesus as a “we,” wondering: “Who are we anyhow? / Who do we belong to? / Are we a we?” (50-52). The poem concludes to make an interesting point about religion and doubt, but for the sake of this analysis, consider the implications of the daughter-speaker allying herself with Christ, as co-sufferers under the tyranny of the Father God. 
    It seems natural that a patriarchal God who is named “father” again and again would be conflated with the biological father of the family unit, but perhaps even more surprising and sinister is the way the Christ figure functions in such a paradigm, as gestured at in the Dickinson poem mentioned earlier, “Victory comes late” and in the examples in Sexton. Stephen Prothero’s book American Jesus studies the many permutations of characterization that Christ has undergone in American culture, and contends that “Antebellum Protestants made over Jesus as the Victorian feminine…Applying to Jesus and his Father the same stark contrasts that other Americans were drawing between women and men” (59). With some thought, one can even see how the figure of Christ seems to align rather closely with a cultural conception of “proper” womanhood. His central task was submission, and his status was that of the “pure” element, sinless, by which humanity could be saved. These characterizations do not seem far afield from the woman continually submitting in the Christian paradigm, and furthermore the admonition of the woman to remain pure bodily. Yet scholarship that considers the link between the deep Puritan and Biblical roots of our American corner of Western civilization and abuse takes this a step further. As Joanne Carlson Brown and Rebecca Parker posit in their essay linking Christian religion to systemic abuse of women, “The central image of Christ on the cross as the saviour of the world communicates the message that suffering is redemptive” (37). Women, made to suffer in numerous ways throughout American history by the restrictions of patriarchy, are natural targets in this paradigm. If suffering is redemptive, than enduring the abuse and punishment of domination in all its permutations is not only necessary, it becomes a holy task and something for which to strive.
    If we read Christ and his submission and suffering as at least in some senses analogous to the gendered prescriptives for “good” women, the door is then open for catastrophic readings of the Father-God. Brown and Parker excoriate the way that “God the Father” and “His Son, Jesus,” read as the ultimate in love and proper familial relation creates a climate where “divine child abuse is paraded as salvific” (37). Drawing a connection between the systemic abuse of women (and children, also) and the Christian ethos, it becomes darkly clear how inhabiting this worldview regularly would create silence around abuse. They argue that the narrative of Christianity asks us to accept that “God’s position is tragic,” (he is torn between love for his created world and its impossible sinfulness—love or justice) and that the son, Christ, is left with an impossible burden. He must “submit to death” in order to “free God” (41). The intimation is that abuse in a family is not a far cry from this dynamic, the victim caught in a war between the love for the parent (the father, in this analysis as well as Brown and Parker’s) and a need for self-preservation. It’s no wonder then, that they conclude that: “The image of God the Father demanding and carrying out the suffering and death of his own son has sustained a culture of abuse” (42). If God is the arbiter of ultimate moral order, and he sends his own son to die, what is left for the child to believe but that her father, whatever his abuses, should also be tolerated in a suffering death of silence? 
    One example of such abuse that has been given an increasing amount of academic attention, both inside the literary studies field and beyond, is the rampant occurrence of incest, between father and daughter in particular. Some of the first forthright depictions of this abuse from the daughter-speaker or woman-observer perspective (at least as far as the canon is currently construed) were offered in poems like Plath’s “Full Fathom Five,” previously discussed, as well as Sexton’s “Briar Rose.” Audre Lorde’s “Chains,” discussing a news item about young girls impregnated by their fathers and returned home anyway appeared in The Black Unicorn in 1978. Lucille Clifton’s poem, “Shapeshifters,” an eerie account of fathers who in the night become horrible instruments of death, which has received more exposure than many works on the subject, was published in 1987. With the attention given the childhood abuse by popular culture in the eighties, these poems were often re-imagined or dealt with more seriously as the topic of incest came into public discourse. A study of the critical reception of Sexton’s “Briar Rose” reveals that a multitude of critical reactions to the poem initially ignored its explicit contents. Later, any acknowledgements relegated the rape of the daughter to the realm of Sexton’s mental illness, to a metaphorical fantasy, to an implicit Electra message (“she wanted it,” to translate it with more cultural immediacy), or resorted to indictments of style that mark the work as vulgar and poorly written (Skorczewski 310). The critical brush-off and silencing of this poem serves as a larger commentary on the way that patriarchal culture has silenced the discussion of incest. Alicia Ostriker’s discussion of this poem asserts that incest is “a version of the Family Romance that neither orthodox psychoanalysis nor our legal system is ready to accept, but that countless women will recognize as painfully accurate” (233). The dialogue of submission and sacrifice seems noteworthy here as a motivating factor for understanding some of that pain.
    A theoretical conversation about incest would likely employ a number of psychoanalytic approaches, whether the frame of the Oedipal complex or the Electra complex. However, an analysis drawn from a shared religious mythology that could arguably be considered more germane to American collective consciousness is an alternative way to discuss these issues. Parker and Brown’s vision of patriarchal Christianity as depicting a “divine child abuse, paraded as salvific,” offers a different way to encounter the father-subject and daughter-speaker in Sexton’s “Divorce, Thy Name is Woman” (545). The opening of the poem is direct address, the speaker to her witness: “I am divorcing daddy—Dybbuk! Dybbuk! / I have been doing it daily all my life” (1-2). The unusual use of “divorce” as a way to understand the separation between father and daughter (rather than between husband and wife) alerts the reader to the reading of the relationship as perhaps suggesting marital relations rather than parent-child ones. The third stanza confirms these suspicions with the dark depiction of an incestuous violation:
    Later,
    when blood and eggs and breasts
    dropped onto me,
    Daddy and his whiskey breath
    made a long midnight visit
    in a dream that is not a dream
    and then called his lawyer quickly.
    Daddy divorcing me. (13-20)
The way womanhood is forced upon the daughter-speaker is underscored by her characterization of puberty—not a willing unfolding of her body but rather something that “dropped onto” her, with the blunt choppy syllables of “blood and eggs and breasts” further accentuating the violence of the encounter. Oblige here a reading of the daughter-speaker bearing womanhood like Christ about to bear the cross. Another midnight event before his betrayal depicted in the Biblical narrative, Christ begs the Father-God to “let this cup pass from me” (Matthew 26:39). Yet there is no reply, and the disciples cannot even stay awake to watch with him. He nears morning with the knowledge that his death lays before him, knowing that he has been made a receptacle for “sin,” not unlike the daughter with the “unclean” elements of womanhood upon her. The daughter is visited in the midnight hour by the father as well, and he too seems to come wordless. The use of “a dream that is not a dream” to describe his “long midnight visit” could perhaps be read as a hostile indictment of critical reception of “Briar Rose.” For critics who imagine the events of that poem as a mere fictive remnant of its princess-protagonist’s dreams, Sexton’s speaker now sets the record straight. The dream is not a dream at all, it is a real event. Yet even as the daughter-speaker has been violated and forced to yield to the father’s will and his “whiskey breath,” he “calls his lawyer quickly,” as though to beat the daughter-speaker to the punch. He will divorce her. She has no business severing their tie—that is his decision. The silent God the Father in the garden of Gethsemane seems to offer a similar dispassion. In the narrative, Christ is betrayed and crucified, and as he cries out in pain on the cross to the God who has “forsaken” him, there is no response (Matthew 27:46). He dies unanswered. 
    Reading the Christ narrative onto Sexton’s “Divorce, Thy Name is Woman” is an artificial rendering that is not intended to explicitly conflate the two, or even to suggest that the poem itself contains any content about Christ. However, Sexton was a poet whose creative works were often preoccupied with Protestant imagery and the figure of Jesus, certain uses of which can be read as allying the poem’s speaker with his plight. These instances will be read closely further on, but given their primacy in her personal iconography, it only seems fair to address the figure of God the Father and Christ the Son. Brown and Parker’s assertion that acceptance of abuse is normalized in a Christian moral framework becomes particularly salient here. The daughter-speaker in “Divorce” is being used in the most profound sense, body and soul. She has been “visit[ed]” by a rapist father who then “dash[es] away / as if I were a disease” (11-12). The daughter is defiant as a speaker in this poem until the very end, when she acknowledges that her life is not so much a divorcing of the father-subject but a realization that “Daddy” will eventually “come home / and stuff me so full of our infected child / that I turn invisible, but married, / at last” (32-35). The need for what Ostriker calls “mutuality” is expressed here through the metaphor of “marriage.” The need to be loved comes at the cost of the hierarchy of abuse, submission, and self-sacrifice. Though she will literally have her insides colonized by the horrible “infected child,” at least she will be a love object for her sacrifice—married. Yet we know from the Daddy’s previous visits that his use of her only seems to disgust him as though she were a “disease.” The union will be fleeting but the abandonment thereafter will be lasting, the reader knows the Daddy’s quick call to the lawyer will repeat itself and he will “divorce” the daughter-speaker from even the most grotesque and abusive expressions of fatherly “affection.” Likewise, Brown and Parker’s characterization of abuse within the Christ-God complex requires the victim to suffer endless degradation in the hopes that the self-sacrifice will eventually be rewarded. Yet as the Father-God turns his face away from the Son on the cross, the father will also reject the daughter. It is as though the act of abuse—the subjection of the child to bear the father’s “need” and “sin”—is too grotesque for him to view thereafter. He simply satisfies the desire and leaves the child again dejected and “divorced.”
    Yet beyond the discussion of Sexton’s speakers as Christ is her many re-ifications of the father-God connection, yet the inability of the daughter-speakers to do anything to exorcise his hold over them. Diana Hume George’s Oedipus Anne offers a tidy summary of Kumin, Ostriker, and Estella Lauter’s concurring views on the topic of Sexton’s father-God subject, contending that throughout the process of her work her “discoveries of the Father-God’s inadequacy are coupled with her inability to give him up” (49). George reads “Grandfather, Your Wand” in concert with “Is It True,” focusing on the image of God and father as wood structures—gesturing again at church but also the wordplay of wood as phallic slang. In “All My Pretty Ones,” the daughter-speaker’s syntax can be manipulated when she says “My God: father,” an account George reads dually (31). Furthermore, George views Sexton’sly-initiating father feeding his young daughter oysters in “The Death of the Fathers” as they share a too-adult laugh together as being analogous to the God Sexton’s speaker meets in the last poem of her last book, who beats her at poker as they again share an uncomfortable laugh (49). The critical reception of Sexton’s work seems to verify that her connection between the figures of Father and God were in fact substantial. Yet despite her furious indictments of father-power and phallus-power, Sexton’s speakers still seem to fail to escape its grip. In “The Death of the Fathers,” the narrative carries the reader through a series of upsetting events in which the power, moral-correctness, and primacy of the father is called into question. He feeds her oysters in a sensual way, he dances too closely with her at a wedding and she can feel his erection, he drives the family boat into a wave and nearly sweeps away the riders. Yet the end of the poem stills finds the daughter facing the father and acknowledging that he is “larger than God or the Devil / He is my history,” and in the end the two are immolated together as in Plath, “two birds on fire” (300-301, 331). Yet for all her attempts to “kill” the father, there are feeble and unsuccessful attempts at the exorcism of his influence. The last poem of her last book finds him still having the last laugh over her, even as she so desperately desires his love and comfort. Sexton and Plath together complete a phase of castration that allow for an unprecedented level of rage and deconstruction of the father-figure, yet his sway still remains in the end. Sharon Olds offers a way out, years later, with the confessional style of Plath and Sexton firmly imprinted in her work.
    Sharon Olds is 10-15 years younger than Plath and Sexton would have been had they lived out fuller, longer lives and careers, and it would seem that the progression of her daughter-speakers were able to find the resolution they never did. Olds wrote about the father-subject extensively over her multiple volumes, but never as completely and resolutely as in The Father, a book that chronicles her care of her father during his illness and death. Satan Says and The Gold Cell, as well as The Dead and the Living contain poems the address the castration of the father similarly to Plath and Sexton, but only The Father carries that process to Daly’s desired conclusion. Ramazani’s discussion of the elegy contends that “Like incest and like the patriarchal canon, bereavement is a tool by which fathers can sometimes maintain dominion over their daughters” (319). Olds seems to defy this characterization, escaping the God-as-father that haunts every page of The Father, finally diminishing him to his proper place as a mortal one in the final pages. 
    The Father certainly re-confirms the Father as God in multiple ways throughout as an establishing mechanism to make his downfall all the more significant. The first poem of the book, “The Waiting,” finds the father waiting for the daughter to visit in his “wing-backed chair,” not unlike a ruler of some kind (line 3). Yet we realize despite his regal pose throughout the poem that he is merely a man waiting for death. The end of the poem still has him seeming perhaps like God-the-Creator, re-purposing the lines of Genesis: “the earth without form, and void / darkness upon the face of it, as if / waiting for his daughter” (32-34). Olds’ daughter-speaker still envisions the mighty father in his chair as a God-figure, but interestingly centralizes herself in his concerns, as though in his making of the world he first waits for her to arrive and to help. Even as the father-subject nears death and mortality, his God-like status persists. He is “like a god producing food from his own mouth” as he suffers from mucus overproduction. (“The Glass,” line 18). He has a “planet” for a head. (“Wonder” line 4). Later in the same poem, the daughter-speaker is dealing with his illness as though she were “one of the shepherd children / when the star came down on the roof,” bearing the announcement as if it were one of an approaching deity (23-24). Even the day before the father dies, his bodily movements reverberate through the daughter-speaker as though she were part of a universe he controlled:
Every time he blinked, the powerful
    wave of the blink moved through my body
    as if God had blinked,
    a world unmade in the jump of an eyelid. (7-10)
This “un-making” persists into a poem about the moments after his death, when the daughter-speaker and her family crowd out in the hallway outside the room where his body lies:
    Now was the center of the end. We stood
    in the hall, apart, guarding the entrance,
    silent, as if God were in there
    unmaking a world. (20-23)

The image of father as his own Creator, making and unmaking himself, seems to persist even unto death. Yet the daughter-speaker observes the father’s wife entering the room to be with his body and returning back out with a surprising response: “I had never seen her so calm,” she relates (38). Here we see the beginnings of the “exorcism,” the strings beginning to unravel. The family begins to reassemble themselves after the disruption of so powerful a force. Yet the lag-time between the death and the realization of the truth of what it means persists. In “The Motel,” The daughter-speaker talks about the motel she always stayed in when visiting her father in his last days, and marvels that it has been torn down. She had felt it was “as far beyond destruction as the Garden of Eden” (6). She recognizes the destruction of a place that solidified the myth of the father as the God-figure may also suggest his destruction is imminent:
    I’d turn on the hot, put my head under 
    as if it were upright Jordan, and I could 
    baptize myself his daughter, and now
    it’s a pile of rubbish—(24-27).

    Olds’ daughter-speaker does the work of castration in the next poem, “I Wanted to Be There When My Father Died.” Having begun to see the imminent deconstruction of what she had so long considered the immutable God that was her father, she tells the reader that she “wanted to see him die” (line 2). The once immortal father, God-like, must be observed in the act of death so as to ascertain that this is reality. Later the poem reaches a moment of conflict, where the daughter-speaker thinks out loud and plumbs her complex feelings. “I wanted to watch my father die / because I hated him. Oh, I loved him, / my hands cherished him, laying him out, / but I had feared him so” (15-17). 
    The most powerful message of Olds’ The Father comes embedded in the final poems, wherein the daughter-speaker finds a kind of joy and peace available to her now that the father has been exorcised in the aftermath of his death. The finishing lines of “I Wanted to Be There When My Father Died” find the daughter-speaker finding some relief and solace in the passing of the father, unlike the anguished self-suicidal impulses present in Plath and to some extent, Sexton. The daughter recalls herself being formed by the father and takes some pleasure in his undoing:
            I was an Eve
    he took and pressed back into clay,
    casual thumbs undoing the cheekbone
    eyesocket rib pelvis ankle of the child
    and now I watched him be undone and 
    someone in me gloried in it,
    someone lying where he’d lain in chintz
    Eden, some corpse girl, corkscrewed like
    one of his amber spit-ems, smiled. (20-27)

Daughter as Eve observes as her father is unmade, the inverse of the process by which he “pressed [her] back into clay.” She feels “someone in [her] glor[y] in it,” perhaps suggesting that not her whole self is glad to be rid of the father, but rather some small portion, some “corpse girl.” Death is present in the poem, both the father’s and that of that “someone” in the daughter, the “corpse girl” who smiles. Yet unlike Plath, who’s daughter-speaker believes her father’s death to be her fault and feels an encompassing suicidal urge as a result, Olds’ daughter-speaker only has that one someone inside of her who is happy. She has managed to escape the father-God and the girl within her whom he molded has passed away too, but the moment is one of relief and “glory,” rather than pain and self-blame. The last lines of the poem are the most telling: “Into other hands than ours / we commend this spirit” (32-33). Family surrounds the daughter as they watch the father into the next world, and she as well as they willingly allow him and all of his meanings pass into “other hands.” Given that the daughter has so long borne the burden of his image, both literally as he has “created” her, and psychically as she has been imbedded internally with his power, she now releases him. His finally mortality allows her to let him go, and unlike the poets previously discussed, she does not have to go with him. She can remain in the land of the living, free from the burden of his heavy love.
    Two final poems seem to most clearly solidify how Olds’ daughter-speaker accomplishes the deconstruction of the Father-God: “To My Father,” and “The Mortal One.” In “To My Father,” the daughter-speaker ponders a life lost to conflating the father with God, as though he had some cosmic sway over her universe. “Mysterious / as God, who are you?” she asks, incredulous that she has so long considered he who is “a dead / man of ground bone” a divine being (10-11, 12-13). She further deconstructs him through the landscape of her world: “You are not / the earth, or the seas, or the heavens, you are not / the air around us,” she relates, incredulous and gathering speed. The climax of the stanza comes in the form of another question. “What have I worshipped?” cries the daughter. The myth roundly dismantled, she lets her father’s name be “dashed down” over the “dam,” releasing him to the natural world from whence his “ground bone” came. Similarly, “The Mortal One” finally visions the inscrutable father-God in the manner that the title suggests. Using the metaphor of glorious historical paintings depicting religious iconography, the daughter-speaker realizes she imagined him as the wrong subject. “Not like Christ but like one of his saints,” she now sees him, and finally, “the tiny naked dead one in the corner, / the mortal one” (3, 19-20).  She has come to terms with who he really is, and it seems nothing short of a relief.
    The process of liberation, castration, and exorcism is by no means a chronological, one-time-only occurrence, nor is it the province of only the women poets who have been studied. Daly’s theory merely serves as an entryway to understand one of the more complex subjects and power dynamics of women’s poetry. Given the continual re-assertion of power-dynamics in women’s poetry, more assessments of the way that patriarchal power mutates outside the trope of the Father-God are helpful as descriptive entrances into psychic and emotional meanings. Yet it seems reassuring that one of the most naked poets of what has been termed “The Family Romance” managed to find some solace and resolution on the matter of the father writ large. Olds’ final poems in The Father additionally vision the father as speaking about the daughter-subject to others in heaven, and ends with a touching poem written from the father-speaker to the daughter-subject, proclaiming his love and ending the book on a hopeful, ebullient note. If Olds is any indication, escape from the phallocentric discourse that embeds such “psychic harm” is a catharsis within reach for the daughter. Perhaps next will come a discourse that can consider fathers in their emerging permutations—as sometime supporters of their daughters, as upholders of freedom and spirit. Perhaps they too will speak in love from heaven—not as the voice of God himself, but as the father reclaimed yet mortal, looking down with pride.






   I walk down the garden paths,
   And all the daffodils
   Are blowing, and the bright blue squills.
   I walk down the patterned garden-paths
   In my stiff, brocaded gown.
   With my powdered hair and jewelled fan,
   I too am a rare
   Pattern.  As I wander down
   The garden paths.

   My dress is richly figured,
   And the train
   Makes a pink and silver stain
   On the gravel, and the thrift
   Of the borders.
   Just a plate of current fashion,
   Tripping by in high-heeled, ribboned shoes.
   Not a softness anywhere about me,
   Only whalebone and brocade.
   And I sink on a seat in the shade
   Of a lime tree.  For my passion
   Wars against the stiff brocade.
   The daffodils and squills
   Flutter in the breeze
   As they please.
   And I weep;
   For the lime-tree is in blossom
   And one small flower has dropped upon my bosom.

   And the plashing of waterdrops
   In the marble fountain
   Comes down the garden-paths.
   The dripping never stops.
   Underneath my stiffened gown
   Is the softness of a woman bathing in a marble basin,
   A basin in the midst of hedges grown
   So thick, she cannot see her lover hiding,
   But she guesses he is near,
   And the sliding of the water
   Seems the stroking of a dear
   Hand upon her.
   What is Summer in a fine brocaded gown!
   I should like to see it lying in a heap upon the ground.
   All the pink and silver crumpled up on the ground.

   I would be the pink and silver as I ran along the paths,
   And he would stumble after,
   Bewildered by my laughter.
   I should see the sun flashing from his sword-hilt and the buckles
     on his shoes.
   I would choose
   To lead him in a maze along the patterned paths,
   A bright and laughing maze for my heavy-booted lover,
   Till he caught me in the shade,
   And the buttons of his waistcoat bruised my body as he clasped me,
   Aching, melting, unafraid.
   With the shadows of the leaves and the sundrops,
   And the plopping of the waterdrops,
   All about us in the open afternoon--
   I am very like to swoon
   With the weight of this brocade,
   For the sun sifts through the shade.

   Underneath the fallen blossom
   In my bosom,
   Is a letter I have hid.
   It was brought to me this morning by a rider from the Duke.
   "Madam, we regret to inform you that Lord Hartwell
   Died in action Thursday se'nnight."
   As I read it in the white, morning sunlight,
   The letters squirmed like snakes.
   "Any answer, Madam," said my footman.
   "No," I told him.
   "See that the messenger takes some refreshment.
   No, no answer."
   And I walked into the garden,
   Up and down the patterned paths,
   In my stiff, correct brocade.
   The blue and yellow flowers stood up proudly in the sun,
   Each one.
   I stood upright too,
   Held rigid to the pattern
   By the stiffness of my gown.
   Up and down I walked,
   Up and down.

   In a month he would have been my husband.
   In a month, here, underneath this lime,
   We would have broke the pattern;
   He for me, and I for him,
   He as Colonel, I as Lady,
   On this shady seat.
   He had a whim
   That sunlight carried blessing.
   And I answered, "It shall be as you have said."
   Now he is dead.

   In Summer and in Winter I shall walk
   Up and down
   The patterned garden-paths
   In my stiff, brocaded gown.
   The squills and daffodils
   Will give place to pillared roses, and to asters, and to snow.
   I shall go
   Up and down,
   In my gown.
   Gorgeously arrayed,
   Boned and stayed.
   And the softness of my body will be guarded from embrace
   By each button, hook, and lace.
   For the man who should loose me is dead,
   Fighting with the Duke in Flanders,
   In a pattern called a war.
   Christ!  What are patterns for?




Pickthorn Manor



       I

   How fresh the Dartle's little waves that day!
    A steely silver, underlined with blue,
   And flashing where the round clouds, blown away,
    Let drop the yellow sunshine to gleam through
   And tip the edges of the waves with shifts
    And spots of whitest fire, hard like gems
       Cut from the midnight moon they were, and sharp
    As wind through leafless stems.
   The Lady Eunice walked between the drifts
   Of blooming cherry-trees, and watched the rifts
       Of clouds drawn through the river's azure warp.


       II

   Her little feet tapped softly down the path.
    Her soul was listless; even the morning breeze
   Fluttering the trees and strewing a light swath
    Of fallen petals on the grass, could please
   Her not at all.  She brushed a hair aside
    With a swift move, and a half-angry frown.
       She stopped to pull a daffodil or two,
    And held them to her gown
   To test the colours; put them at her side,
   Then at her breast, then loosened them and tried
       Some new arrangement, but it would not do.


       III

   A lady in a Manor-house, alone,
    Whose husband is in Flanders with the Duke
   Of Marlborough and Prince Eugene, she's grown
    Too apathetic even to rebuke
   Her idleness.  What is she on this Earth?
    No woman surely, since she neither can
       Be wed nor single, must not let her mind
    Build thoughts upon a man
   Except for hers.  Indeed that were no dearth
   Were her Lord here, for well she knew his worth,
       And when she thought of him her eyes were kind.


       IV

   Too lately wed to have forgot the wooing.
    Too unaccustomed as a bride to feel
   Other than strange delight at her wife's doing.
    Even at the thought a gentle blush would steal
   Over her face, and then her lips would frame
    Some little word of loving, and her eyes
       Would brim and spill their tears, when all they saw
    Was the bright sun, slantwise
   Through burgeoning trees, and all the morning's flame
   Burning and quivering round her.  With quick shame
       She shut her heart and bent before the law.


       V

   He was a soldier, she was proud of that.
    This was his house and she would keep it well.
   His honour was in fighting, hers in what
    He'd left her here in charge of.  Then a spell
   Of conscience sent her through the orchard spying
    Upon the gardeners.  Were their tools about?
       Were any branches broken?  Had the weeds
    Been duly taken out
   Under the 'spaliered pears, and were these lying
   Nailed snug against the sunny bricks and drying
       Their leaves and satisfying all their needs?


       VI

   She picked a stone up with a little pout,
    Stones looked so ill in well-kept flower-borders.
   Where should she put it?  All the paths about
    Were strewn with fair, red gravel by her orders.
   No stone could mar their sifted smoothness.  So
    She hurried to the river.  At the edge
       She stood a moment charmed by the swift blue
    Beyond the river sedge.
   She watched it curdling, crinkling, and the snow
   Purfled upon its wave-tops.  Then, "Hullo,
       My Beauty, gently, or you'll wriggle through."


       VII

   The Lady Eunice caught a willow spray
    To save herself from tumbling in the shallows
   Which rippled to her feet.  Then straight away
    She peered down stream among the budding sallows.
   A youth in leather breeches and a shirt
    Of finest broidered lawn lay out upon
       An overhanging bole and deftly swayed
    A well-hooked fish which shone
   In the pale lemon sunshine like a spurt
   Of silver, bowed and damascened, and girt
       With crimson spots and moons which waned and played.


       VIII

   The fish hung circled for a moment, ringed
    And bright; then flung itself out, a thin blade
   Of spotted lightning, and its tail was winged
    With chipped and sparkled sunshine.  And the shade
   Broke up and splintered into shafts of light
    Wheeling about the fish, who churned the air
       And made the fish-line hum, and bent the rod
    Almost to snapping.  Care
   The young man took against the twigs, with slight,
   Deft movements he kept fish and line in tight
       Obedience to his will with every prod.


       IX

   He lay there, and the fish hung just beyond.
    He seemed uncertain what more he should do.
   He drew back, pulled the rod to correspond,
    Tossed it and caught it; every time he threw,
   He caught it nearer to the point.  At last
    The fish was near enough to touch.  He paused.
       Eunice knew well the craft--"What's got the thing!"
    She cried.  "What can have caused--
   Where is his net?  The moment will be past.
   The fish will wriggle free."  She stopped aghast.
       He turned and bowed.  One arm was in a sling.


       X

   The broad, black ribbon she had thought his basket
    Must hang from, held instead a useless arm.
   "I do not wonder, Madam, that you ask it."
    He smiled, for she had spoke aloud.  "The charm
   Of trout fishing is in my eyes enhanced
    When you must play your fish on land as well."
       "How will you take him?" Eunice asked.  "In truth
    I really cannot tell.
   'Twas stupid of me, but it simply chanced
   I never thought of that until he glanced
       Into the branches.  'Tis a bit uncouth."


       XI

   He watched the fish against the blowing sky,
    Writhing and glittering, pulling at the line.
   "The hook is fast, I might just let him die,"
    He mused.  "But that would jar against your fine
   Sense of true sportsmanship, I know it would,"
    Cried Eunice.  "Let me do it."  Swift and light
       She ran towards him.  "It is so long now
    Since I have felt a bite,
   I lost all heart for everything."  She stood,
   Supple and strong, beside him, and her blood
       Tingled her lissom body to a glow.


       XII

   She quickly seized the fish and with a stone
    Ended its flurry, then removed the hook,
   Untied the fly with well-poised fingers.  Done,
    She asked him where he kept his fishing-book.
   He pointed to a coat flung on the ground.
    She searched the pockets, found a shagreen case,
       Replaced the fly, noticed a golden stamp
    Filling the middle space.
   Two letters half rubbed out were there, and round
   About them gay rococo flowers wound
       And tossed a spray of roses to the clamp.


       XIII

   The Lady Eunice puzzled over these.
    "G. D." the young man gravely said.  "My name
   Is Gervase Deane.  Your servant, if you please."
    "Oh, Sir, indeed I know you, for your fame
   For exploits in the field has reached my ears.
    I did not know you wounded and returned."
       "But just come back, Madam.  A silly prick
    To gain me such unearned
   Holiday making.  And you, it appears,
   Must be Sir Everard's lady.  And my fears
       At being caught a-trespassing were quick."


       XIV

   He looked so rueful that she laughed out loud.
    "You are forgiven, Mr. Deane.  Even more,
   I offer you the fishing, and am proud
    That you should find it pleasant from this shore.
   Nobody fishes now, my husband used
    To angle daily, and I too with him.
       He loved the spotted trout, and pike, and dace.
    He even had a whim
   That flies my fingers tied swiftly confused
   The greater fish.  And he must be excused,
       Love weaves odd fancies in a lonely place."


       XV

   She sighed because it seemed so long ago,
    Those days with Everard; unthinking took
   The path back to the orchard.  Strolling so
    She walked, and he beside her.  In a nook
   Where a stone seat withdrew beneath low boughs,
    Full-blossomed, hummed with bees, they sat them down.
       She questioned him about the war, the share
    Her husband had, and grown
   Eager by his clear answers, straight allows
   Her hidden hopes and fears to speak, and rouse
       Her numbed love, which had slumbered unaware.


       XVI

   Under the orchard trees daffodils danced
    And jostled, turning sideways to the wind.
   A dropping cherry petal softly glanced
    Over her hair, and slid away behind.
   At the far end through twisted cherry-trees
    The old house glowed, geranium-hued, with bricks
       Bloomed in the sun like roses, low and long,
    Gabled, and with quaint tricks
   Of chimneys carved and fretted.  Out of these
   Grey smoke was shaken, which the faint Spring breeze
       Tossed into nothing.  Then a thrush's song


       XVII

   Needled its way through sound of bees and river.
    The notes fell, round and starred, between young leaves,
   Trilled to a spiral lilt, stopped on a quiver.
    The Lady Eunice listens and believes.
   Gervase has many tales of her dear Lord,
    His bravery, his knowledge, his charmed life.
       She quite forgets who's speaking in the gladness
    Of being this man's wife.
   Gervase is wounded, grave indeed, the word
   Is kindly said, but to a softer chord
       She strings her voice to ask with wistful sadness,


       XVIII

   "And is Sir Everard still unscathed?  I fain
    Would know the truth."  "Quite well, dear Lady, quite."
   She smiled in her content.  "So many slain,
    You must forgive me for a little fright."
   And he forgave her, not alone for that,
    But because she was fingering his heart,
       Pressing and squeezing it, and thinking so
    Only to ease her smart
   Of painful, apprehensive longing.  At
   Their feet the river swirled and chucked.  They sat
       An hour there.  The thrush flew to and fro.


       XIX

   The Lady Eunice supped alone that day,
    As always since Sir Everard had gone,
   In the oak-panelled parlour, whose array
    Of faded portraits in carved mouldings shone.
   Warriors and ladies, armoured, ruffed, peruked.
    Van Dykes with long, slim fingers; Holbeins, stout
       And heavy-featured; and one Rubens dame,
    A peony just burst out,
   With flaunting, crimson flesh.  Eunice rebuked
   Her thoughts of gentler blood, when these had duked
       It with the best, and scorned to change their name.


       XX

   A sturdy family, and old besides,
    Much older than her own, the Earls of Crowe.
   Since Saxon days, these men had sought their brides
    Among the highest born, but always so,
   Taking them to themselves, their wealth, their lands,
    But never their titles.  Stern perhaps, but strong,
       The Framptons fed their blood from richest streams,
    Scorning the common throng.
   Gazing upon these men, she understands
   The toughness of the web wrought from such strands
       And pride of Everard colours all her dreams.


       XXI

   Eunice forgets to eat, watching their faces
    Flickering in the wind-blown candle's shine.
   Blue-coated lackeys tiptoe to their places,
    And set out plates of fruit and jugs of wine.
   The table glitters black like Winter ice.
    The Dartle's rushing, and the gentle clash
       Of blossomed branches, drifts into her ears.
    And through the casement sash
   She sees each cherry stem a pointed slice
   Of splintered moonlight, topped with all the spice
       And shimmer of the blossoms it uprears.


       XXII

   "In such a night--" she laid the book aside,
    She could outnight the poet by thinking back.
   In such a night she came here as a bride.
    The date was graven in the almanack
   Of her clasped memory.  In this very room
    Had Everard uncloaked her.  On this seat
       Had drawn her to him, bade her note the trees,
    How white they were and sweet
   And later, coming to her, her dear groom,
   Her Lord, had lain beside her in the gloom
       Of moon and shade, and whispered her to ease.


       XXIII

   Her little taper made the room seem vast,
    Caverned and empty.  And her beating heart
   Rapped through the silence all about her cast
    Like some loud, dreadful death-watch taking part
   In this sad vigil.  Slowly she undrest,
    Put out the light and crept into her bed.
       The linen sheets were fragrant, but so cold.
    And brimming tears she shed,
   Sobbing and quivering in her barren nest,
   Her weeping lips into the pillow prest,
       Her eyes sealed fast within its smothering fold.


       XXIV

   The morning brought her a more stoic mind,
    And sunshine struck across the polished floor.
   She wondered whether this day she should find
    Gervase a-fishing, and so listen more,
   Much more again, to all he had to tell.
    And he was there, but waiting to begin
       Until she came.  They fished awhile, then went
    To the old seat within
   The cherry's shade.  He pleased her very well
   By his discourse.  But ever he must dwell
       Upon Sir Everard.  Each incident


       XXV

   Must be related and each term explained.
    How troops were set in battle, how a siege
   Was ordered and conducted.  She complained
    Because he bungled at the fall of Liege.
   The curious names of parts of forts she knew,
    And aired with conscious pride her ravelins,
       And counterscarps, and lunes.  The day drew on,
    And his dead fish's fins
   In the hot sunshine turned a mauve-green hue.
   At last Gervase, guessing the hour, withdrew.
       But she sat long in still oblivion.


       XXVI

   Then he would bring her books, and read to her
    The poems of Dr. Donne, and the blue river
   Would murmur through the reading, and a stir
    Of birds and bees make the white petals shiver,
   And one or two would flutter prone and lie
    Spotting the smooth-clipped grass.  The days went by
       Threaded with talk and verses.  Green leaves pushed
    Through blossoms stubbornly.
   Gervase, unconscious of dishonesty,
   Fell into strong and watchful loving, free
       He thought, since always would his lips be hushed.


       XXVII

   But lips do not stay silent at command,
    And Gervase strove in vain to order his.
   Luckily Eunice did not understand
    That he but read himself aloud, for this
   Their friendship would have snapped.  She treated him
    And spoilt him like a brother.  It was now
       "Gervase" and "Eunice" with them, and he dined
    Whenever she'd allow,
   In the oak parlour, underneath the dim
   Old pictured Framptons, opposite her slim
       Figure, so bright against the chair behind.


       XXVIII

   Eunice was happier than she had been
    For many days, and yet the hours were long.
   All Gervase told to her but made her lean
    More heavily upon the past.  Among
   Her hopes she lived, even when she was giving
    Her morning orders, even when she twined
       Nosegays to deck her parlours.  With the thought
    Of Everard, her mind
   Solaced its solitude, and in her striving
   To do as he would wish was all her living.
       She welcomed Gervase for the news he brought.


       XXIX

   Black-hearts and white-hearts, bubbled with the sun,
    Hid in their leaves and knocked against each other.
   Eunice was standing, panting with her run
    Up to the tool-house just to get another
   Basket.  All those which she had brought were filled,
    And still Gervase pelted her from above.
       The buckles of his shoes flashed higher and higher
    Until his shoulders strove
   Quite through the top.  "Eunice, your spirit's filled
   This tree.  White-hearts!"  He shook, and cherries spilled
       And spat out from the leaves like falling fire.


       XXX

   The wide, sun-winged June morning spread itself
    Over the quiet garden.  And they packed
   Full twenty baskets with the fruit.  "My shelf
    Of cordials will be stored with what it lacked.
   In future, none of us will drink strong ale,
    But cherry-brandy."  "Vastly good, I vow,"
       And Gervase gave the tree another shake.
    The cherries seemed to flow
   Out of the sky in cloudfuls, like blown hail.
   Swift Lady Eunice ran, her farthingale,
       Unnoticed, tangling in a fallen rake.


       XXXI

   She gave a little cry and fell quite prone
    In the long grass, and lay there very still.
   Gervase leapt from the tree at her soft moan,
    And kneeling over her, with clumsy skill
   Unloosed her bodice, fanned her with his hat,
    And his unguarded lips pronounced his heart.
       "Eunice, my Dearest Girl, where are you hurt?"
    His trembling fingers dart
   Over her limbs seeking some wound.  She strove
   To answer, opened wide her eyes, above
       Her knelt Sir Everard, with face alert.


       XXXII

   Her eyelids fell again at that sweet sight,
    "My Love!" she murmured, "Dearest!  Oh, my Dear!"
   He took her in his arms and bore her right
    And tenderly to the old seat, and "Here
   I have you mine at last," she said, and swooned
    Under his kisses.  When she came once more
       To sight of him, she smiled in comfort knowing
    Herself laid as before
   Close covered on his breast.  And all her glowing
   Youth answered him, and ever nearer growing
       She twined him in her arms and soft festooned


       XXXIII

   Herself about him like a flowering vine,
    Drawing his lips to cling upon her own.
   A ray of sunlight pierced the leaves to shine
    Where her half-opened bodice let be shown
   Her white throat fluttering to his soft caress,
    Half-gasping with her gladness.  And her pledge
       She whispers, melting with delight.  A twig
    Snaps in the hornbeam hedge.
   A cackling laugh tears through the quietness.
   Eunice starts up in terrible distress.
       "My God!  What's that?"  Her staring eyes are big.


       XXXIV

   Revulsed emotion set her body shaking
    As though she had an ague.  Gervase swore,
   Jumped to his feet in such a dreadful taking
    His face was ghastly with the look it wore.
   Crouching and slipping through the trees, a man
    In worn, blue livery, a humpbacked thing,
       Made off.  But turned every few steps to gaze
    At Eunice, and to fling
   Vile looks and gestures back.  "The ruffian!
   By Christ's Death!  I will split him to a span
       Of hog's thongs."  She grasped at his sleeve, "Gervase!


       XXXV

   What are you doing here?  Put down that sword,
    That's only poor old Tony, crazed and lame.
   We never notice him.  With my dear Lord
    I ought not to have minded that he came.
   But, Gervase, it surprises me that you
    Should so lack grace to stay here."  With one hand
       She held her gaping bodice to conceal
    Her breast.  "I must demand
   Your instant absence.  Everard, but new
   Returned, will hardly care for guests.  Adieu."
       "Eunice, you're mad."  His brain began to reel.


       XXXVI

   He tried again to take her, tried to twist
    Her arms about him.  Truly, she had said
   Nothing should ever part them.  In a mist
    She pushed him from her, clasped her aching head
   In both her hands, and rocked and sobbed aloud.
    "Oh!  Where is Everard?  What does this mean?
       So lately come to leave me thus alone!"
    But Gervase had not seen
   Sir Everard.  Then, gently, to her bowed
   And sickening spirit, he told of her proud
       Surrender to him.  He could hear her moan.


       XXXVII

   Then shame swept over her and held her numb,
    Hiding her anguished face against the seat.
   At last she rose, a woman stricken--dumb--
    And trailed away with slowly-dragging feet.
   Gervase looked after her, but feared to pass
    The barrier set between them.  All his rare
       Joy broke to fragments--worse than that, unreal.
    And standing lonely there,
   His swollen heart burst out, and on the grass
   He flung himself and wept.  He knew, alas!
       The loss so great his life could never heal.


       XXXVIII

   For days thereafter Eunice lived retired,
    Waited upon by one old serving-maid.
   She would not leave her chamber, and desired
    Only to hide herself.  She was afraid
   Of what her eyes might trick her into seeing,
    Of what her longing urge her then to do.
       What was this dreadful illness solitude
    Had tortured her into?
   Her hours went by in a long constant fleeing
   The thought of that one morning.  And her being
       Bruised itself on a happening so rude.


       XXXIX

   It grew ripe Summer, when one morning came
    Her tirewoman with a letter, printed
   Upon the seal were the Deane crest and name.
    With utmost gentleness, the letter hinted
   His understanding and his deep regret.
    But would she not permit him once again
       To pay her his profound respects?  No word
    Of what had passed should pain
   Her resolution.  Only let them get
   Back the old comradeship.  Her eyes were wet
       With starting tears, now truly she deplored


       XL

   His misery.  Yes, she was wrong to keep
    Away from him.  He hardly was to blame.
   'Twas she--she shuddered and began to weep.
    'Twas her fault!  Hers!  Her everlasting shame
   Was that she suffered him, whom not at all
    She loved.  Poor Boy!  Yes, they must still be friends.
       She owed him that to keep the balance straight.
    It was such poor amends
   Which she could make for rousing hopes to gall
   Him with their unfulfilment.  Tragical
       It was, and she must leave him desolate.


       XLI

   Hard silence he had forced upon his lips
    For long and long, and would have done so still
   Had not she--here she pressed her finger tips
    Against her heavy eyes.  Then with forced will
   She wrote that he might come, sealed with the arms
    Of Crowe and Frampton twined.  Her heart felt lighter
       When this was done.  It seemed her constant care
    Might some day cease to fright her.
   Illness could be no crime, and dreadful harms
   Did come from too much sunshine.  Her alarms
       Would lessen when she saw him standing there,


       XLII

   Simple and kind, a brother just returned
    From journeying, and he would treat her so.
   She knew his honest heart, and if there burned
    A spark in it he would not let it show.
   But when he really came, and stood beside
    Her underneath the fruitless cherry boughs,
       He seemed a tired man, gaunt, leaden-eyed.
    He made her no more vows,
   Nor did he mention one thing he had tried
   To put into his letter.  War supplied
       Him topics.  And his mind seemed occupied.


       XLIII

   Daily they met.  And gravely walked and talked.
    He read her no more verses, and he stayed
   Only until their conversation, balked
    Of every natural channel, fled dismayed.
   Again the next day she would meet him, trying
    To give her tone some healthy sprightliness,
       But his uneager dignity soon chilled
    Her well-prepared address.
   Thus Summer waned, and in the mornings, crying
   Of wild geese startled Eunice, and their flying
       Whirred overhead for days and never stilled.


       XLIV

   One afternoon of grey clouds and white wind,
    Eunice awaited Gervase by the river.
   The Dartle splashed among the reeds and whined
    Over the willow-roots, and a long sliver
   Of caked and slobbered foam crept up the bank.
    All through the garden, drifts of skirling leaves
       Blew up, and settled down, and blew again.
    The cherry-trees were weaves
   Of empty, knotted branches, and a dank
   Mist hid the house, mouldy it smelt and rank
       With sodden wood, and still unfalling rain.


       XLV

   Eunice paced up and down.  No joy she took
    At meeting Gervase, but the custom grown
   Still held her.  He was late.  She sudden shook,
    And caught at her stopped heart.  Her eyes had shown
   Sir Everard emerging from the mist.
    His uniform was travel-stained and torn,
       His jackboots muddy, and his eager stride
    Jangled his spurs.  A thorn
   Entangled, trailed behind him.  To the tryst
   He hastened.  Eunice shuddered, ran--a twist
       Round a sharp turning and she fled to hide.


       XLVI

   But he had seen her as she swiftly ran,
    A flash of white against the river's grey.
   "Eunice," he called.  "My Darling.  Eunice.  Can
    You hear me?  It is Everard.  All day
   I have been riding like the very devil
    To reach you sooner.  Are you startled, Dear?"
       He broke into a run and followed her,
    And caught her, faint with fear,
   Cowering and trembling as though she some evil
   Spirit were seeing.  "What means this uncivil
       Greeting, Dear Heart?"  He saw her senses blur.


       XLVII

   Swaying and catching at the seat, she tried
    To speak, but only gurgled in her throat.
   At last, straining to hold herself, she cried
    To him for pity, and her strange words smote
   A coldness through him, for she begged Gervase
    To leave her, 'twas too much a second time.
       Gervase must go, always Gervase, her mind
    Repeated like a rhyme
   This name he did not know.  In sad amaze
   He watched her, and that hunted, fearful gaze,
       So unremembering and so unkind.


       XLVIII

   Softly he spoke to her, patiently dealt
    With what he feared her madness.  By and by
   He pierced her understanding.  Then he knelt
    Upon the seat, and took her hands:  "Now try
   To think a minute I am come, my Dear,
    Unharmed and back on furlough.  Are you glad
       To have your lover home again?  To me,
    Pickthorn has never had
   A greater pleasantness.  Could you not bear
   To come and sit awhile beside me here?
       A stone between us surely should not be."


       XLIX

   She smiled a little wan and ravelled smile,
    Then came to him and on his shoulder laid
   Her head, and they two rested there awhile,
    Each taking comfort.  Not a word was said.
   But when he put his hand upon her breast
    And felt her beating heart, and with his lips
       Sought solace for her and himself.  She started
    As one sharp lashed with whips,
   And pushed him from her, moaning, his dumb quest
   Denied and shuddered from.  And he, distrest,
       Loosened his wife, and long they sat there, parted.


       L

   Eunice was very quiet all that day,
    A little dazed, and yet she seemed content.
   At candle-time, he asked if she would play
    Upon her harpsichord, at once she went
   And tinkled airs from Lully's 'Carnival'
    And 'Bacchus', newly brought away from France.
       Then jaunted through a lively rigadoon
    To please him with a dance
   By Purcell, for he said that surely all
   Good Englishmen had pride in national
       Accomplishment.  But tiring of it soon


       LI

   He whispered her that if she had forgiven
    His startling her that afternoon, the clock
   Marked early bed-time.  Surely it was Heaven
    He entered when she opened to his knock.
   The hours rustled in the trailing wind
    Over the chimney.  Close they lay and knew
       Only that they were wedded.  At his touch
    Anxiety she threw
   Away like a shed garment, and inclined
   Herself to cherish him, her happy mind
       Quivering, unthinking, loving overmuch.


       LII

   Eunice lay long awake in the cool night
    After her husband slept.  She gazed with joy
   Into the shadows, painting them with bright
    Pictures of all her future life's employ.
   Twin gems they were, set to a single jewel,
    Each shining with the other.  Soft she turned
       And felt his breath upon her hair, and prayed
    Her happiness was earned.
   Past Earls of Crowe should give their blood for fuel
   To light this Frampton's hearth-fire.  By no cruel
       Affrightings would she ever be dismayed.


       LIII

   When Everard, next day, asked her in joke
    What name it was that she had called him by,
   She told him of Gervase, and as she spoke
    She hardly realized it was a lie.
   Her vision she related, but she hid
    The fondness into which she had been led.
       Sir Everard just laughed and pinched her ear,
    And quite out of her head
   The matter drifted.  Then Sir Everard chid
   Himself for laziness, and off he rid
       To see his men and count his farming-gear.


       LIV

   At supper he seemed overspread with gloom,
    But gave no reason why, he only asked
   More questions of Gervase, and round the room
    He walked with restless strides.  At last he tasked
   Her with a greater feeling for this man
    Than she had given.  Eunice quick denied
       The slightest interest other than a friend
    Might claim.  But he replied
   He thought she underrated.  Then a ban
   He put on talk and music.  He'd a plan
       To work at, draining swamps at Pickthorn End.


       LV

   Next morning Eunice found her Lord still changed,
    Hard and unkind, with bursts of anger.  Pride
   Kept him from speaking out.  His probings ranged
    All round his torment.  Lady Eunice tried
   To sooth him.  So a week went by, and then
    His anguish flooded over; with clenched hands
       Striving to stem his words, he told her plain
    Tony had seen them, "brands
   Burning in Hell," the man had said.  Again
   Eunice described her vision, and how when
       Awoke at last she had known dreadful pain.


       LVI

   He could not credit it, and misery fed
    Upon his spirit, day by day it grew.
   To Gervase he forbade the house, and led
    The Lady Eunice such a life she flew
   At his approaching footsteps.  Winter came
    Snowing and blustering through the Manor trees.
       All the roof-edges spiked with icicles
    In fluted companies.
   The Lady Eunice with her tambour-frame
   Kept herself sighing company.  The flame
       Of the birch fire glittered on the walls.


       LVII

   A letter was brought to her as she sat,
    Unsealed, unsigned.  It told her that his wound,
   The writer's, had so well recovered that
    To join his regiment he felt him bound.
   But would she not wish him one short "Godspeed",
    He asked no more.  Her greeting would suffice.
       He had resolved he never should return.
    Would she this sacrifice
   Make for a dying man?  How could she read
   The rest!  But forcing her eyes to the deed,
       She read.  Then dropped it in the fire to burn.


       LVIII

   Gervase had set the river for their meeting
    As farthest from the farms where Everard
   Spent all his days.  How should he know such cheating
    Was quite expected, at least no dullard
   Was Everard Frampton.  Hours by hours he hid
    Among the willows watching.  Dusk had come,
       And from the Manor he had long been gone.
    Eunice her burdensome
   Task set about.  Hooded and cloaked, she slid
   Over the slippery paths, and soon amid
       The sallows saw a boat tied to a stone.


       LIX

   Gervase arose, and kissed her hand, then pointed
    Into the boat.  She shook her head, but he
   Begged her to realize why, and with disjointed
    Words told her of what peril there might be
   From listeners along the river bank.
    A push would take them out of earshot.  Ten
       Minutes was all he asked, then she should land,
    He go away again,
   Forever this time.  Yet how could he thank
   Her for so much compassion.  Here she sank
       Upon a thwart, and bid him quick unstrand


       LX

   His boat.  He cast the rope, and shoved the keel
    Free of the gravel; jumped, and dropped beside
   Her; took the oars, and they began to steal
    Under the overhanging trees.  A wide
   Gash of red lantern-light cleft like a blade
    Into the gloom, and struck on Eunice sitting
       Rigid and stark upon the after thwart.
    It blazed upon their flitting
   In merciless light.  A moment so it stayed,
   Then was extinguished, and Sir Everard made
       One leap, and landed just a fraction short.


       LXI

   His weight upon the gunwale tipped the boat
    To straining balance.  Everard lurched and seized
   His wife and held her smothered to his coat.
    "Everard, loose me, we shall drown--" and squeezed
   Against him, she beat with her hands.  He gasped
    "Never, by God!"  The slidden boat gave way
       And the black foamy water split--and met.
    Bubbled up through the spray
   A wailing rose and in the branches rasped,
   And creaked, and stilled.  Over the treetops, clasped
       In the blue evening, a clear moon was set.


       LXII

   They lie entangled in the twisting roots,
    Embraced forever.  Their cold marriage bed
   Close-canopied and curtained by the shoots
    Of willows and pale birches.  At the head,
   White lilies, like still swans, placidly float
    And sway above the pebbles.  Here are waves
       Sun-smitten for a threaded counterpane
    Gold-woven on their graves.
   In perfect quietness they sleep, remote
   In the green, rippled twilight.  Death has smote
       Them to perpetual oneness who were twain.




The Cremona Violin



       Part First

   Frau Concert-Meister Altgelt shut the door.
   A storm was rising, heavy gusts of wind
   Swirled through the trees, and scattered leaves before
   Her on the clean, flagged path.  The sky behind
   The distant town was black, and sharp defined
   Against it shone the lines of roofs and towers,
   Superimposed and flat like cardboard flowers.

   A pasted city on a purple ground,
   Picked out with luminous paint, it seemed.  The cloud
   Split on an edge of lightning, and a sound
   Of rivers full and rushing boomed through bowed,
   Tossed, hissing branches.  Thunder rumbled loud
   Beyond the town fast swallowing into gloom.
   Frau Altgelt closed the windows of each room.

   She bustled round to shake by constant moving
   The strange, weird atmosphere.  She stirred the fire,
   She twitched the supper-cloth as though improving
   Its careful setting, then her own attire
   Came in for notice, tiptoeing higher and higher
   She peered into the wall-glass, now adjusting
   A straying lock, or else a ribbon thrusting

   This way or that to suit her.  At last sitting,
   Or rather plumping down upon a chair,
   She took her work, the stocking she was knitting,
   And watched the rain upon the window glare
   In white, bright drops.  Through the black glass a flare
   Of lightning squirmed about her needles.  "Oh!"
   She cried.  "What can be keeping Theodore so!"

   A roll of thunder set the casements clapping.
   Frau Altgelt flung her work aside and ran,
   Pulled open the house door, with kerchief flapping
   She stood and gazed along the street.  A man
   Flung back the garden-gate and nearly ran
   Her down as she stood in the door.  "Why, Dear,
   What in the name of patience brings you here?

   Quick, Lotta, shut the door, my violin
   I fear is wetted.  Now, Dear, bring a light.
   This clasp is very much too worn and thin.
   I'll take the other fiddle out to-night
   If it still rains.  Tut! Tut! my child, you're quite
   Clumsy.  Here, help me, hold the case while I--
   Give me the candle.  No, the inside's dry.

   Thank God for that!  Well, Lotta, how are you?
   A bad storm, but the house still stands, I see.
   Is my pipe filled, my Dear?  I'll have a few
   Puffs and a snooze before I eat my tea.
   What do you say?  That you were feared for me?
   Nonsense, my child.  Yes, kiss me, now don't talk.
   I need a rest, the theatre's a long walk."

   Her needles still, her hands upon her lap
   Patiently laid, Charlotta Altgelt sat
   And watched the rain-run window.  In his nap
   Her husband stirred and muttered.  Seeing that,
   Charlotta rose and softly, pit-a-pat,
   Climbed up the stairs, and in her little room
   Found sighing comfort with a moon in bloom.

   But even rainy windows, silver-lit
   By a new-burst, storm-whetted moon, may give
   But poor content to loneliness, and it
   Was hard for young Charlotta so to strive
   And down her eagerness and learn to live
   In placid quiet.  While her husband slept,
   Charlotta in her upper chamber wept.

   Herr Concert-Meister Altgelt was a man
   Gentle and unambitious, that alone
   Had kept him back.  He played as few men can,
   Drawing out of his instrument a tone
   So shimmering-sweet and palpitant, it shone
   Like a bright thread of sound hung in the air,
   Afloat and swinging upward, slim and fair.

   Above all things, above Charlotta his wife,
   Herr Altgelt loved his violin, a fine
   Cremona pattern, Stradivari's life
   Was flowering out of early discipline
   When this was fashioned.  Of soft-cutting pine
   The belly was.  The back of broadly curled
   Maple, the head made thick and sharply whirled.

      The slanting, youthful sound-holes through
      The belly of fine, vigorous pine
      Mellowed each note and blew
      It out again with a woody flavour
      Tanged and fragrant as fir-trees are
      When breezes in their needles jar.

      The varnish was an orange-brown
      Lustered like glass that's long laid down
      Under a crumbling villa stone.
      Purfled stoutly, with mitres which point
      Straight up the corners.  Each curve and joint
      Clear, and bold, and thin.
      Such was Herr Theodore's violin.

   Seven o'clock, the Concert-Meister gone
   With his best violin, the rain being stopped,
   Frau Lotta in the kitchen sat alone
   Watching the embers which the fire dropped.
   The china shone upon the dresser, topped
   By polished copper vessels which her skill
   Kept brightly burnished.  It was very still.

   An air from 'Orfeo' hummed in her head.
   Herr Altgelt had been practising before
   The night's performance.  Charlotta had plead
   With him to stay with her.  Even at the door
   She'd begged him not to go.  "I do implore
   You for this evening, Theodore," she had said.
   "Leave them to-night, and stay with me instead."

   "A silly poppet!"  Theodore pinched her ear.
   "You'd like to have our good Elector turn
   Me out I think."  "But, Theodore, something queer
   Ails me.  Oh, do but notice how they burn,
   My cheeks!  The thunder worried me.  You're stern,
   And cold, and only love your work, I know.
   But Theodore, for this evening, do not go."

   But he had gone, hurriedly at the end,
   For she had kept him talking.  Now she sat
   Alone again, always alone, the trend
   Of all her thinking brought her back to that
   She wished to banish.  What would life be?  What?
   For she was young, and loved, while he was moved
   Only by music.  Each day that was proved.

   Each day he rose and practised.  While he played,
   She stopped her work and listened, and her heart
   Swelled painfully beneath her bodice.  Swayed
   And longing, she would hide from him her smart.
   "Well, Lottchen, will that do?"  Then what a start
   She gave, and she would run to him and cry,
   And he would gently chide her, "Fie, Dear, fie.

   I'm glad I played it well.  But such a taking!
   You'll hear the thing enough before I've done."
   And she would draw away from him, still shaking.
   Had he but guessed she was another one,
   Another violin.  Her strings were aching,
   Stretched to the touch of his bow hand, again
   He played and she almost broke at the strain.

   Where was the use of thinking of it now,
   Sitting alone and listening to the clock!
   She'd best make haste and knit another row.
   Three hours at least must pass before his knock
   Would startle her.  It always was a shock.
   She listened--listened--for so long before,
   That when it came her hearing almost tore.

   She caught herself just starting in to listen.
   What nerves she had:  rattling like brittle sticks!
   She wandered to the window, for the glisten
   Of a bright moon was tempting.  Snuffed the wicks
   Of her two candles.  Still she could not fix
   To anything.  The moon in a broad swath
   Beckoned her out and down the garden-path.

   Against the house, her hollyhocks stood high
   And black, their shadows doubling them.  The night
   Was white and still with moonlight, and a sigh
   Of blowing leaves was there, and the dim flight
   Of insects, and the smell of aconite,
   And stocks, and Marvel of Peru.  She flitted
   Along the path, where blocks of shadow pitted

   The even flags.  She let herself go dreaming
   Of Theodore her husband, and the tune
   From 'Orfeo' swam through her mind, but seeming
   Changed--shriller.  Of a sudden, the clear moon
   Showed her a passer-by, inopportune
   Indeed, but here he was, whistling and striding.
   Lotta squeezed in between the currants, hiding.

   "The best laid plans of mice and men," alas!
   The stranger came indeed, but did not pass.
   Instead, he leant upon the garden-gate,
   Folding his arms and whistling.  Lotta's state,
   Crouched in the prickly currants, on wet grass,
   Was far from pleasant.  Still the stranger stayed,
   And Lotta in her currants watched, dismayed.

   He seemed a proper fellow standing there
   In the bright moonshine.  His cocked hat was laced
   With silver, and he wore his own brown hair
   Tied, but unpowdered.  His whole bearing graced
   A fine cloth coat, and ruffled shirt, and chased
   Sword-hilt.  Charlotta looked, but her position
   Was hardly easy.  When would his volition

   Suggest his walking on?  And then that tune!
   A half-a-dozen bars from 'Orfeo'
   Gone over and over, and murdered.  What Fortune
   Had brought him there to stare about him so?
   "Ach, Gott im Himmel!  Why will he not go!"
   Thought Lotta, but the young man whistled on,
   And seemed in no great hurry to be gone.

   Charlotta, crouched among the currant bushes,
   Watched the moon slowly dip from twig to twig.
   If Theodore should chance to come, and blushes
   Streamed over her.  He would not care a fig,
   He'd only laugh.  She pushed aside a sprig
   Of sharp-edged leaves and peered, then she uprose
   Amid her bushes.  "Sir," said she, "pray whose

   Garden do you suppose you're watching?  Why
   Do you stand there?  I really must insist
   Upon your leaving.  'Tis unmannerly
   To stay so long."  The young man gave a twist
   And turned about, and in the amethyst
   Moonlight he saw her like a nymph half-risen
   From the green bushes which had been her prison.

   He swept his hat off in a hurried bow.
   "Your pardon, Madam, I had no idea
   I was not quite alone, and that is how
   I came to stay.  My trespass was not sheer
   Impertinence.  I thought no one was here,
   And really gardens cry to be admired.
   To-night especially it seemed required.

   And may I beg to introduce myself?
   Heinrich Marohl of Munich.  And your name?"
   Charlotta told him.  And the artful elf
   Promptly exclaimed about her husband's fame.
   So Lotta, half-unwilling, slowly came
   To conversation with him.  When she went
   Into the house, she found the evening spent.

   Theodore arrived quite wearied out and teased,
   With all excitement in him burned away.
   It had gone well, he said, the audience pleased,
   And he had played his very best to-day,
   But afterwards he had been forced to stay
   And practise with the stupid ones.  His head
   Ached furiously, and he must get to bed.


       Part Second

      Herr Concert-Meister Altgelt played,
      And the four strings of his violin
      Were spinning like bees on a day in Spring.
      The notes rose into the wide sun-mote
      Which slanted through the window,
      They lay like coloured beads a-row,
      They knocked together and parted,
      And started to dance,
      Skipping, tripping, each one slipping
      Under and over the others so
      That the polychrome fire streamed like a lance
      Or a comet's tail,
      Behind them.
      Then a wail arose--crescendo--
      And dropped from off the end of the bow,
      And the dancing stopped.
      A scent of lilies filled the room,
      Long and slow.  Each large white bloom
      Breathed a sound which was holy perfume from a blessed censer,
      And the hum of an organ tone,
      And they waved like fans in a hall of stone
      Over a bier standing there in the centre, alone.
      Each lily bent slowly as it was blown.
      Like smoke they rose from the violin--
      Then faded as a swifter bowing
      Jumbled the notes like wavelets flowing
      In a splashing, pashing, rippling motion
      Between broad meadows to an ocean
      Wide as a day and blue as a flower,
      Where every hour
      Gulls dipped, and scattered, and squawked, and squealed,
      And over the marshes the Angelus pealed,
      And the prows of the fishing-boats were spattered
      With spray.
      And away a couple of frigates were starting
      To race to Java with all sails set,
      Topgallants, and royals, and stunsails, and jibs,
      And wide moonsails; and the shining rails
      Were polished so bright they sparked in the sun.
      All the sails went up with a run:
          "They call me Hanging Johnny,
             Away-i-oh;
          They call me Hanging Johnny,
             So hang, boys, hang."
      And the sun had set and the high moon whitened,
      And the ship heeled over to the breeze.
      He drew her into the shade of the sails,
      And whispered tales
      Of voyages in the China seas,
      And his arm around her
      Held and bound her.
      She almost swooned,
      With the breeze and the moon
      And the slipping sea,
      And he beside her,
      Touching her, leaning--
      The ship careening,
      With the white moon steadily shining over
      Her and her lover,
      Theodore, still her lover!

      Then a quiver fell on the crowded notes,
      And slowly floated
      A single note which spread and spread
      Till it filled the room with a shimmer like gold,
      And noises shivered throughout its length,
      And tried its strength.
      They pulled it, and tore it,
      And the stuff waned thinner, but still it bore it.
      Then a wide rent
      Split the arching tent,
      And balls of fire spurted through,
      Spitting yellow, and mauve, and blue.
      One by one they were quenched as they fell,
      Only the blue burned steadily.
      Paler and paler it grew, and--faded--away.
            Herr Altgelt stopped.

   "Well, Lottachen, my Dear, what do you say?
   I think I'm in good trim.  Now let's have dinner.
   What's this, my Love, you're very sweet to-day.
   I wonder how it happens I'm the winner
   Of so much sweetness.  But I think you're thinner;
   You're like a bag of feathers on my knee.
   Why, Lotta child, you're almost strangling me.

   I'm glad you're going out this afternoon.
   The days are getting short, and I'm so tied
   At the Court Theatre my poor little bride
   Has not much junketing I fear, but soon
   I'll ask our manager to grant a boon.
   To-night, perhaps, I'll get a pass for you,
   And when I go, why Lotta can come too.

   Now dinner, Love.  I want some onion soup
   To whip me up till that rehearsal's over.
   You know it's odd how some women can stoop!
   Fraeulein Gebnitz has taken on a lover,
   A Jew named Goldstein.  No one can discover
   If it's his money.  But she lives alone
   Practically.  Gebnitz is a stone,

   Pores over books all day, and has no ear
   For his wife's singing.  Artists must have men;
   They need appreciation.  But it's queer
   What messes people make of their lives, when
   They should know more.  If Gebnitz finds out, then
   His wife will pack.  Yes, shut the door at once.
   I did not feel it cold, I am a dunce."

   Frau Altgelt tied her bonnet on and went
   Into the streets.  A bright, crisp Autumn wind
   Flirted her skirts and hair.  A turbulent,
   Audacious wind it was, now close behind,
   Pushing her bonnet forward till it twined
   The strings across her face, then from in front
   Slantingly swinging at her with a shunt,

   Until she lay against it, struggling, pushing,
   Dismayed to find her clothing tightly bound
   Around her, every fold and wrinkle crushing
   Itself upon her, so that she was wound
   In draperies as clinging as those found
   Sucking about a sea nymph on the frieze
   Of some old Grecian temple.  In the breeze

   The shops and houses had a quality
   Of hard and dazzling colour; something sharp
   And buoyant, like white, puffing sails at sea.
   The city streets were twanging like a harp.
   Charlotta caught the movement, skippingly
   She blew along the pavement, hardly knowing
   Toward what destination she was going.

   She fetched up opposite a jeweller's shop,
   Where filigreed tiaras shone like crowns,
   And necklaces of emeralds seemed to drop
   And then float up again with lightness.  Browns
   Of striped agates struck her like cold frowns
   Amid the gaiety of topaz seals,
   Carved though they were with heads, and arms, and wheels.

   A row of pencils knobbed with quartz or sard
   Delighted her.  And rings of every size
   Turned smartly round like hoops before her eyes,
   Amethyst-flamed or ruby-girdled, jarred
   To spokes and flashing triangles, and starred
   Like rockets bursting on a festal day.
   Charlotta could not tear herself away.

   With eyes glued tightly on a golden box,
   Whose rare enamel piqued her with its hue,
   Changeable, iridescent, shuttlecocks
   Of shades and lustres always darting through
   Its level, superimposing sheet of blue,
   Charlotta did not hear footsteps approaching.
   She started at the words:  "Am I encroaching?"

   "Oh, Heinrich, how you frightened me!  I thought
   We were to meet at three, is it quite that?"
   "No, it is not," he answered, "but I've caught
   The trick of missing you.  One thing is flat,
   I cannot go on this way.  Life is what
   Might best be conjured up by the word:  'Hell'.
   Dearest, when will you come?"  Lotta, to quell

   His effervescence, pointed to the gems
   Within the window, asked him to admire
   A bracelet or a buckle.  But one stems
   Uneasily the burning of a fire.
   Heinrich was chafing, pricked by his desire.
   Little by little she wooed him to her mood
   Until at last he promised to be good.

   But here he started on another tack;
   To buy a jewel, which one would Lotta choose.
   She vainly urged against him all her lack
   Of other trinkets.  Should she dare to use
   A ring or brooch her husband might accuse
   Her of extravagance, and ask to see
   A strict accounting, or still worse might be.

   But Heinrich would not be persuaded.  Why
   Should he not give her what he liked?  And in
   He went, determined certainly to buy
   A thing so beautiful that it would win
   Her wavering fancy.  Altgelt's violin
   He would outscore by such a handsome jewel
   That Lotta could no longer be so cruel!

   Pity Charlotta, torn in diverse ways.
   If she went in with him, the shopman might
   Recognize her, give her her name; in days
   To come he could denounce her.  In her fright
   She almost fled.  But Heinrich would be quite
   Capable of pursuing.  By and by
   She pushed the door and entered hurriedly.

   It took some pains to keep him from bestowing
   A pair of ruby earrings, carved like roses,
   The setting twined to represent the growing
   Tendrils and leaves, upon her.  "Who supposes
   I could obtain such things!  It simply closes
   All comfort for me."  So he changed his mind
   And bought as slight a gift as he could find.

   A locket, frosted over with seed pearls,
   Oblong and slim, for wearing at the neck,
   Or hidden in the bosom; their joined curls
   Should lie in it.  And further to bedeck
   His love, Heinrich had picked a whiff, a fleck,
   The merest puff of a thin, linked chain
   To hang it from.  Lotta could not refrain

   From weeping as they sauntered down the street.
   She did not want the locket, yet she did.
   To have him love her she found very sweet,
   But it is hard to keep love always hid.
   Then there was something in her heart which chid
   Her, told her she loved Theodore in him,
   That all these meetings were a foolish whim.

   She thought of Theodore and the life they led,
   So near together, but so little mingled.
   The great clouds bulged and bellied overhead,
   And the fresh wind about her body tingled;
   The crane of a large warehouse creaked and jingled;
   Charlotta held her breath for very fear,
   About her in the street she seemed to hear:
       "They call me Hanging Johnny,
          Away-i-oh;
       They call me Hanging Johnny,
          So hang, boys, hang."

   And it was Theodore, under the racing skies,
   Who held her and who whispered in her ear.
   She knew her heart was telling her no lies,
   Beating and hammering.  He was so dear,
   The touch of him would send her in a queer
   Swoon that was half an ecstasy.  And yearning
   For Theodore, she wandered, slowly turning

   Street after street as Heinrich wished it so.
   He had some aim, she had forgotten what.
   Their progress was confused and very slow,
   But at the last they reached a lonely spot,
   A garden far above the highest shot
   Of soaring steeple.  At their feet, the town
   Spread open like a chequer-board laid down.

   Lotta was dimly conscious of the rest,
   Vaguely remembered how he clasped the chain
   About her neck.  She treated it in jest,
   And saw his face cloud over with sharp pain.
   Then suddenly she felt as though a strain
   Were put upon her, collared like a slave,
   Leashed in the meshes of this thing he gave.

   She seized the flimsy rings with both her hands
   To snap it, but they held with odd persistence.
   Her eyes were blinded by two wind-blown strands
   Of hair which had been loosened.  Her resistance
   Melted within her, from remotest distance,
   Misty, unreal, his face grew warm and near,
   And giving way she knew him very dear.

   For long he held her, and they both gazed down
   At the wide city, and its blue, bridged river.
   From wooing he jested with her, snipped the blown
   Strands of her hair, and tied them with a sliver
   Cut from his own head.  But she gave a shiver
   When, opening the locket, they were placed
   Under the glass, commingled and enlaced.

   "When will you have it so with us?"  He sighed.
   She shook her head.  He pressed her further.  "No,
   No, Heinrich, Theodore loves me," and she tried
   To free herself and rise.  He held her so,
   Clipped by his arms, she could not move nor go.
   "But you love me," he whispered, with his face
   Burning against her through her kerchief's lace.

   Frau Altgelt knew she toyed with fire, knew
   That what her husband lit this other man
   Fanned to hot flame.  She told herself that few
   Women were so discreet as she, who ran
   No danger since she knew what things to ban.
   She opened her house door at five o'clock,
   A short half-hour before her husband's knock.


       Part Third

   The 'Residenz-Theater' sparked and hummed
   With lights and people.  Gebnitz was to sing,
   That rare soprano.  All the fiddles strummed
   With tuning up; the wood-winds made a ring
   Of reedy bubbling noises, and the sting
   Of sharp, red brass pierced every ear-drum; patting
   From muffled tympani made a dark slatting

   Across the silver shimmering of flutes;
   A bassoon grunted, and an oboe wailed;
   The 'celli pizzicato-ed like great lutes,
   And mutterings of double basses trailed
   Away to silence, while loud harp-strings hailed
   Their thin, bright colours down in such a scatter
   They lost themselves amid the general clatter.

   Frau Altgelt in the gallery, alone,
   Felt lifted up into another world.
   Before her eyes a thousand candles shone
   In the great chandeliers.  A maze of curled
   And powdered periwigs past her eyes swirled.
   She smelt the smoke of candles guttering,
   And caught the glint of jewelled fans fluttering

   All round her in the boxes.  Red and gold,
   The house, like rubies set in filigree,
   Filliped the candlelight about, and bold
   Young sparks with eye-glasses, unblushingly
   Ogled fair beauties in the balcony.
   An officer went by, his steel spurs jangling.
   Behind Charlotta an old man was wrangling

   About a play-bill he had bought and lost.
   Three drunken soldiers had to be ejected.
   Frau Altgelt's eyes stared at the vacant post
   Of Concert-Meister, she at once detected
   The stir which brought him.  But she felt neglected
   When with no glance about him or her way,
   He lifted up his violin to play.

      The curtain went up?  Perhaps.  If so,
      Charlotta never saw it go.
      The famous Fraeulein Gebnitz' singing
      Only came to her like the ringing
      Of bells at a festa
      Which swing in the air
      And nobody realizes they are there.
      They jingle and jangle,
      And clang, and bang,
      And never a soul could tell whether they rang,
      For the plopping of guns and rockets
      And the chinking of silver to spend, in one's pockets,
      And the shuffling and clapping of feet,
      And the loud flapping
      Of flags, with the drums,
      As the military comes.
      It's a famous tune to walk to,
      And I wonder where they're off to.
      Step-step-stepping to the beating of the drums.
      But the rhythm changes as though a mist
      Were curling and twisting
      Over the landscape.
      For a moment a rhythmless, tuneless fog
      Encompasses her.  Then her senses jog
      To the breath of a stately minuet.
      Herr Altgelt's violin is set
      In tune to the slow, sweeping bows, and retreats and advances,
      To curtsies brushing the waxen floor as the Court dances.
      Long and peaceful like warm Summer nights
      When stars shine in the quiet river.  And against the lights
      Blundering insects knock,
      And the 'Rathaus' clock
      Booms twice, through the shrill sounds
      Of flutes and horns in the lamplit grounds.
      Pressed against him in the mazy wavering
      Of a country dance, with her short breath quavering
      She leans upon the beating, throbbing
      Music.  Laughing, sobbing,
      Feet gliding after sliding feet;
      His--hers--
      The ballroom blurs--
      She feels the air
      Lifting her hair,
      And the lapping of water on the stone stair.
      He is there!  He is there!
      Twang harps, and squeal, you thin violins,
      That the dancers may dance, and never discover
      The old stone stair leading down to the river
      With the chestnut-tree branches hanging over
      Her and her lover.
      Theodore, still her lover!

   The evening passed like this, in a half faint,
   Delirium with waking intervals
   Which were the entr'acts.  Under the restraint
   Of a large company, the constant calls
   For oranges or syrops from the stalls
   Outside, the talk, the passing to and fro,
   Lotta sat ill at ease, incognito.

   She heard the Gebnitz praised, the tenor lauded,
   The music vaunted as most excellent.
   The scenery and the costumes were applauded,
   The latter it was whispered had been sent
   From Italy.  The Herr Direktor spent
   A fortune on them, so the gossips said.
   Charlotta felt a lightness in her head.

   When the next act began, her eyes were swimming,
   Her prodded ears were aching and confused.
   The first notes from the orchestra sent skimming
   Her outward consciousness.  Her brain was fused
   Into the music, Theodore's music!  Used
   To hear him play, she caught his single tone.
   For all she noticed they two were alone.


       Part Fourth

   Frau Altgelt waited in the chilly street,
   Hustled by lackeys who ran up and down
   Shouting their coachmen's names; forced to retreat
   A pace or two by lurching chairmen; thrown
   Rudely aside by linkboys; boldly shown
   The ogling rapture in two bleary eyes
   Thrust close to hers in most unpleasant wise.

   Escaping these, she hit a liveried arm,
   Was sworn at by this glittering gentleman
   And ordered off.  However, no great harm
   Came to her.  But she looked a trifle wan
   When Theodore, her belated guardian,
   Emerged.  She snuggled up against him, trembling,
   Half out of fear, half out of the assembling

   Of all the thoughts and needs his playing had given.
   Had she enjoyed herself, he wished to know.
   "Oh! Theodore, can't you feel that it was Heaven!"
   "Heaven!  My Lottachen, and was it so?
   Gebnitz was in good voice, but all the flow
   Of her last aria was spoiled by Klops,
   A wretched flutist, she was mad as hops."

   He was so simple, so matter-of-fact,
   Charlotta Altgelt knew not what to say
   To bring him to her dream.  His lack of tact
   Kept him explaining all the homeward way
   How this thing had gone well, that badly.  "Stay,
   Theodore!" she cried at last.  "You know to me
   Nothing was real, it was an ecstasy."

   And he was heartily glad she had enjoyed
   Herself so much, and said so.  "But it's good
   To be got home again."  He was employed
   In looking at his violin, the wood
   Was old, and evening air did it no good.
   But when he drew up to the table for tea
   Something about his wife's vivacity

   Struck him as hectic, worried him in short.
   He talked of this and that but watched her close.
   Tea over, he endeavoured to extort
   The cause of her excitement.  She arose
   And stood beside him, trying to compose
   Herself, all whipt to quivering, curdled life,
   And he, poor fool, misunderstood his wife.

   Suddenly, broken through her anxious grasp,
   Her music-kindled love crashed on him there.
   Amazed, he felt her fling against him, clasp
   Her arms about him, weighing down his chair,
   Sobbing out all her hours of despair.
   "Theodore, a woman needs to hear things proved.
   Unless you tell me, I feel I'm not loved."

   Theodore went under in this tearing wave,
   He yielded to it, and its headlong flow
   Filled him with all the energy she gave.
   He was a youth again, and this bright glow,
   This living, vivid joy he had to show
   Her what she was to him.  Laughing and crying,
   She asked assurances there's no denying.

   Over and over again her questions, till
   He quite convinced her, every now and then
   She kissed him, shivering as though doubting still.
   But later when they were composed and when
   She dared relax her probings, "Lottachen,"
   He asked, "how is it your love has withstood
   My inadvertence?  I was made of wood."

   She told him, and no doubt she meant it truly,
   That he was sun, and grass, and wind, and sky
   To her.  And even if conscience were unruly
   She salved it by neat sophistries, but why
   Suppose her insincere, it was no lie
   She said, for Heinrich was as much forgot
   As though he'd never been within earshot.

   But Theodore's hands in straying and caressing
   Fumbled against the locket where it lay
   Upon her neck.  "What is this thing I'm pressing?"
   He asked.  "Let's bring it to the light of day."
   He lifted up the locket.  "It should stay
   Outside, my Dear.  Your mother has good taste.
   To keep it hidden surely is a waste."

   Pity again Charlotta, straight aroused
   Out of her happiness.  The locket brought
   A chilly jet of truth upon her, soused
   Under its icy spurting she was caught,
   And choked, and frozen.  Suddenly she sought
   The clasp, but with such art was this contrived
   Her fumbling fingers never once arrived

   Upon it.  Feeling, twisting, round and round,
   She pulled the chain quite through the locket's ring
   And still it held.  Her neck, encompassed, bound,
   Chafed at the sliding meshes.  Such a thing
   To hurl her out of joy!  A gilded string
   Binding her folly to her, and those curls
   Which lay entwined beneath the clustered pearls!

   Again she tried to break the cord.  It stood.
   "Unclasp it, Theodore," she begged.  But he
   Refused, and being in a happy mood,
   Twitted her with her inefficiency,
   Then looking at her very seriously:
   "I think, Charlotta, it is well to have
   Always about one what a mother gave.

   As she has taken the great pains to send
   This jewel to you from Dresden, it will be
   Ingratitude if you do not intend
   To carry it about you constantly.
   With her fine taste you cannot disagree,
   The locket is most beautifully designed."
   He opened it and there the curls were, twined.

   Charlotta's heart dropped beats like knitting-stitches.
   She burned a moment, flaming; then she froze.
   Her face was jerked by little, nervous twitches,
   She heard her husband asking:  "What are those?"
   Put out her hand quickly to interpose,
   But stopped, the gesture half-complete, astounded
   At the calm way the question was propounded.

   "A pretty fancy, Dear, I do declare.
   Indeed I will not let you put it off.
   A lovely thought:  yours and your mother's hair!"
   Charlotta hid a gasp under a cough.
   "Never with my connivance shall you doff
   This charming gift."  He kissed her on the cheek,
   And Lotta suffered him, quite crushed and meek.

   When later in their room she lay awake,
   Watching the moonlight slip along the floor,
   She felt the chain and wept for Theodore's sake.
   She had loved Heinrich also, and the core
   Of truth, unlovely, startled her.  Wherefore
   She vowed from now to break this double life
   And see herself only as Theodore's wife.


       Part Fifth

   It was no easy matter to convince
   Heinrich that it was finished.  Hard to say
   That though they could not meet (he saw her wince)
   She still must keep the locket to allay
   Suspicion in her husband.  She would pay
   Him from her savings bit by bit--the oath
   He swore at that was startling to them both.

   Her resolution taken, Frau Altgelt
   Adhered to it, and suffered no regret.
   She found her husband all that she had felt
   His music to contain.  Her days were set
   In his as though she were an amulet
   Cased in bright gold.  She joyed in her confining;
   Her eyes put out her looking-glass with shining.

   Charlotta was so gay that old, dull tasks
   Were furbished up to seem like rituals.
   She baked and brewed as one who only asks
   The right to serve.  Her daily manuals
   Of prayer were duties, and her festivals
   When Theodore praised some dish, or frankly said
   She had a knack in making up a bed.

   So Autumn went, and all the mountains round
   The city glittered white with fallen snow,
   For it was Winter.  Over the hard ground
   Herr Altgelt's footsteps came, each one a blow.
   On the swept flags behind the currant row
   Charlotta stood to greet him.  But his lip
   Only flicked hers.  His Concert-Meistership

   Was first again.  This evening he had got
   Important news.  The opera ordered from
   Young Mozart was arrived.  That old despot,
   The Bishop of Salzburg, had let him come
   Himself to lead it, and the parts, still hot
   From copying, had been tried over.  Never
   Had any music started such a fever.

   The orchestra had cheered till they were hoarse,
   The singers clapped and clapped.  The town was made,
   With such a great attraction through the course
   Of Carnival time.  In what utter shade
   All other cities would be left!  The trade
   In music would all drift here naturally.
   In his excitement he forgot his tea.

   Lotta was forced to take his cup and put
   It in his hand.  But still he rattled on,
   Sipping at intervals.  The new catgut
   Strings he was using gave out such a tone
   The "Maestro" had remarked it, and had gone
   Out of his way to praise him.  Lotta smiled,
   He was as happy as a little child.

   From that day on, Herr Altgelt, more and more,
   Absorbed himself in work.  Lotta at first
   Was patient and well-wishing.  But it wore
   Upon her when two weeks had brought no burst
   Of loving from him.  Then she feared the worst;
   That his short interest in her was a light
   Flared up an instant only in the night.

   'Idomeneo' was the opera's name,
   A name that poor Charlotta learnt to hate.
   Herr Altgelt worked so hard he seldom came
   Home for his tea, and it was very late,
   Past midnight sometimes, when he knocked.  His state
   Was like a flabby orange whose crushed skin
   Is thin with pulling, and all dented in.

   He practised every morning and her heart
   Followed his bow.  But often she would sit,
   While he was playing, quite withdrawn apart,
   Absently fingering and touching it,
   The locket, which now seemed to her a bit
   Of some gone youth.  His music drew her tears,
   And through the notes he played, her dreading ears

   Heard Heinrich's voice, saying he had not changed;
   Beer merchants had no ecstasies to take
   Their minds off love.  So far her thoughts had ranged
   Away from her stern vow, she chanced to take
   Her way, one morning, quite by a mistake,
   Along the street where Heinrich had his shop.
   What harm to pass it since she should not stop!

   It matters nothing how one day she met
   Him on a bridge, and blushed, and hurried by.
   Nor how the following week he stood to let
   Her pass, the pavement narrowing suddenly.
   How once he took her basket, and once he
   Pulled back a rearing horse who might have struck
   Her with his hoofs.  It seemed the oddest luck

   How many times their business took them each
   Right to the other.  Then at last he spoke,
   But she would only nod, he got no speech
   From her.  Next time he treated it in joke,
   And that so lightly that her vow she broke
   And answered.  So they drifted into seeing
   Each other as before.  There was no fleeing.

   Christmas was over and the Carnival
   Was very near, and tripping from each tongue
   Was talk of the new opera.  Each book-stall
   Flaunted it out in bills, what airs were sung,
   What singers hired.  Pictures of the young
   "Maestro" were for sale.  The town was mad.
   Only Charlotta felt depressed and sad.

   Each day now brought a struggle 'twixt her will
   And Heinrich's.  'Twixt her love for Theodore
   And him.  Sometimes she wished to kill
   Herself to solve her problem.  For a score
   Of reasons Heinrich tempted her.  He bore
   Her moods with patience, and so surely urged
   Himself upon her, she was slowly merged

   Into his way of thinking, and to fly
   With him seemed easy.  But next morning would
   The Stradivarius undo her mood.
   Then she would realize that she must cleave
   Always to Theodore.  And she would try
   To convince Heinrich she should never leave,
   And afterwards she would go home and grieve.

   All thought in Munich centered on the part
   Of January when there would be given
   'Idomeneo' by Wolfgang Mozart.
   The twenty-ninth was fixed.  And all seats, even
   Those almost at the ceiling, which were driven
   Behind the highest gallery, were sold.
   The inches of the theatre went for gold.

   Herr Altgelt was a shadow worn so thin
   With work, he hardly printed black behind
   The candle.  He and his old violin
   Made up one person.  He was not unkind,
   But dazed outside his playing, and the rind,
   The pine and maple of his fiddle, guarded
   A part of him which he had quite discarded.

      It woke in the silence of frost-bright nights,
      In little lights,
      Like will-o'-the-wisps flickering, fluttering,
      Here--there--
      Spurting, sputtering,
      Fading and lighting,
      Together, asunder--
      Till Lotta sat up in bed with wonder,
      And the faint grey patch of the window shone
      Upon her sitting there, alone.
      For Theodore slept.

   The twenty-eighth was last rehearsal day,
   'Twas called for noon, so early morning meant
   Herr Altgelt's only time in which to play
   His part alone.  Drawn like a monk who's spent
   Himself in prayer and fasting, Theodore went
   Into the kitchen, with a weary word
   Of cheer to Lotta, careless if she heard.

      Lotta heard more than his spoken word.
      She heard the vibrating of strings and wood.
      She was washing the dishes, her hands all suds,
      When the sound began,
      Long as the span
      Of a white road snaking about a hill.
      The orchards are filled
      With cherry blossoms at butterfly poise.
      Hawthorn buds are cracking,
      And in the distance a shepherd is clacking
      His shears, snip-snipping the wool from his sheep.
      The notes are asleep,
      Lying adrift on the air
      In level lines
      Like sunlight hanging in pines and pines,
      Strung and threaded,
      All imbedded
      In the blue-green of the hazy pines.
      Lines--long, straight lines!
      And stems,
      Long, straight stems
      Pushing up
      To the cup of blue, blue sky.
      Stems growing misty
      With the many of them,
      Red-green mist
      Of the trees,
      And these
      Wood-flavoured notes.
      The back is maple and the belly is pine.
      The rich notes twine
      As though weaving in and out of leaves,
      Broad leaves
      Flapping slowly like elephants' ears,
      Waving and falling.
      Another sound peers
      Through little pine fingers,
      And lingers, peeping.
      Ping!  Ping!  pizzicato, something is cheeping.
      There is a twittering up in the branches,
      A chirp and a lilt,
      And crimson atilt on a swaying twig.
      Wings!  Wings!
      And a little ruffled-out throat which sings.
      The forest bends, tumultuous
      With song.
      The woodpecker knocks,
      And the song-sparrow trills,
      Every fir, and cedar, and yew
      Has a nest or a bird,
      It is quite absurd
      To hear them cutting across each other:
      Peewits, and thrushes, and larks, all at once,
      And a loud cuckoo is trying to smother
      A wood-pigeon perched on a birch,
      "Roo--coo--oo--oo--"
      "Cuckoo!  Cuckoo!  That's one for you!"
      A blackbird whistles, how sharp, how shrill!
      And the great trees toss
      And leaves blow down,
      You can almost hear them splash on the ground.
      The whistle again:
      It is double and loud!
      The leaves are splashing,
      And water is dashing
      Over those creepers, for they are shrouds;
      And men are running up them to furl the sails,
      For there is a capful of wind to-day,
      And we are already well under way.
      The deck is aslant in the bubbling breeze.
      "Theodore, please.
      Oh, Dear, how you tease!"
      And the boatswain's whistle sounds again,
      And the men pull on the sheets:
          "My name is Hanging Johnny,
             Away-i-oh;
          They call me Hanging Johnny,
             So hang, boys, hang."
      The trees of the forest are masts, tall masts;
      They are swinging over
      Her and her lover.
      Almost swooning
      Under the ballooning canvas,
      She lies
      Looking up in his eyes
      As he bends farther over.
      Theodore, still her lover!

   The suds were dried upon Charlotta's hands,
   She leant against the table for support,
   Wholly forgotten.  Theodore's eyes were brands
   Burning upon his music.  He stopped short.
   Charlotta almost heard the sound of bands
   Snapping.  She put one hand up to her heart,
   Her fingers touched the locket with a start.

   Herr Altgelt put his violin away
   Listlessly.  "Lotta, I must have some rest.
   The strain will be a hideous one to-day.
   Don't speak to me at all.  It will be best
   If I am quiet till I go."  And lest
   She disobey, he left her.  On the stairs
   She heard his mounting steps.  What use were prayers!

   He could not hear, he was not there, for she
   Was married to a mummy, a machine.
   Her hand closed on the locket bitterly.
   Before her, on a chair, lay the shagreen
   Case of his violin.  She saw the clean
   Sun flash the open clasp.  The locket's edge
   Cut at her fingers like a pushing wedge.

   A heavy cart went by, a distant bell
   Chimed ten, the fire flickered in the grate.
   She was alone.  Her throat began to swell
   With sobs.  What kept her here, why should she wait?
   The violin she had begun to hate
   Lay in its case before her.  Here she flung
   The cover open.  With the fiddle swung

   Over her head, the hanging clock's loud ticking
   Caught on her ear.  'Twas slow, and as she paused
   The little door in it came open, flicking
   A wooden cuckoo out:  "Cuckoo!"  It caused
   The forest dream to come again.  "Cuckoo!"
   Smashed on the grate, the violin broke in two.

   "Cuckoo!  Cuckoo!" the clock kept striking on;
   But no one listened.  Frau Altgelt had gone.




The Cross-Roads



A bullet through his heart at dawn.  On the table a letter signed with a
woman's name.  A wind that goes howling round the house, and weeping as
in shame.  Cold November dawn peeping through the windows, cold dawn
creeping over the floor, creeping up his cold legs, creeping over his
cold body, creeping across his cold face. A glaze of thin yellow
sunlight on the staring eyes.  Wind howling through bent branches.  A
wind which never dies down.  Howling, wailing. The gazing eyes glitter
in the sunlight.  The lids are frozen open and the eyes glitter.


The thudding of a pick on hard earth.  A spade grinding and crunching.
Overhead, branches writhing, winding, interlacing, unwinding,
scattering; tortured twinings, tossings, creakings.  Wind flinging
branches apart, drawing them together, whispering and whining among
them.  A waning, lopsided moon cutting through black clouds.  A stream
of pebbles and earth and the empty spade gleams clear in the moonlight,
then is rammed again into the black earth.  Tramping of feet.  Men and
horses. Squeaking of wheels.

"Whoa!  Ready, Jim?"

"All ready."

Something falls, settles, is still.  Suicides have no coffin.

"Give us the stake, Jim.  Now."

Pound!  Pound!

"He'll never walk.  Nailed to the ground."

An ash stick pierces his heart, if it buds the roots will hold him. He
is a part of the earth now, clay to clay.  Overhead the branches sway,
and writhe, and twist in the wind.  He'll never walk with a bullet in
his heart, and an ash stick nailing him to the cold, black ground.


Six months he lay still.  Six months.  And the water welled up in his
body, and soft blue spots chequered it.  He lay still, for the ash stick
held him in place.  Six months!  Then her face came out of a mist of
green. Pink and white and frail like Dresden china, lilies-of-the-valley
at her breast, puce-coloured silk sheening about her.  Under the young
green leaves, the horse at a foot-pace, the high yellow wheels of the
chaise scarcely turning, her face, rippling like grain a-blowing, under
her puce-coloured bonnet; and burning beside her, flaming within his
correct blue coat and brass buttons, is someone.  What has dimmed the
sun? The horse steps on a rolling stone; a wind in the branches makes a
moan. The little leaves tremble and shake, turn and quake, over and
over, tearing their stems.  There is a shower of young leaves, and a
sudden-sprung gale wails in the trees.

The yellow-wheeled chaise is rocking--rocking, and all the branches
are knocking--knocking.  The sun in the sky is a flat, red plate, the
branches creak and grate.  She screams and cowers, for the green foliage
is a lowering wave surging to smother her.  But she sees nothing. The
stake holds firm.  The body writhes, the body squirms. The blue spots
widen, the flesh tears, but the stake wears well in the deep, black
ground.  It holds the body in the still, black ground.


Two years!  The body has been in the ground two years.  It is worn away;
it is clay to clay.  Where the heart moulders, a greenish dust, the
stake is thrust.  Late August it is, and night; a night flauntingly
jewelled with stars, a night of shooting stars and loud insect noises.
Down the road to Tilbury, silence--and the slow flapping of large
leaves. Down the road to Sutton, silence--and the darkness of
heavy-foliaged trees. Down the road to Wayfleet, silence--and the
whirring scrape of insects in the branches.  Down the road to
Edgarstown, silence--and stars like stepping-stones in a pathway
overhead.  It is very quiet at the cross-roads, and the sign-board
points the way down the four roads, endlessly points the way where
nobody wishes to go.

A horse is galloping, galloping up from Sutton.  Shaking the wide, still
leaves as he goes under them.  Striking sparks with his iron shoes;
silencing the katydids.  Dr. Morgan riding to a child-birth over Tilbury
way; riding to deliver a woman of her first-born son.  One o'clock from
Wayfleet bell tower, what a shower of shooting stars!  And a breeze all
of a sudden, jarring the big leaves and making them jerk up and down.
Dr. Morgan's hat is blown from his head, the horse swerves, and curves
away from the sign-post.  An oath--spurs--a blurring of grey mist. A
quick left twist, and the gelding is snorting and racing down the
Tilbury road with the wind dropping away behind him.

The stake has wrenched, the stake has started, the body, flesh from
flesh, has parted.  But the bones hold tight, socket and ball, and
clamping them down in the hard, black ground is the stake, wedged
through ribs and spine. The bones may twist, and heave, and twine, but
the stake holds them still in line.  The breeze goes down, and the round
stars shine, for the stake holds the fleshless bones in line.


Twenty years now!  Twenty long years!  The body has powdered itself
away; it is clay to clay.  It is brown earth mingled with brown earth.
Only flaky bones remain, lain together so long they fit, although not
one bone is knit to another.  The stake is there too, rotted through,
but upright still, and still piercing down between ribs and spine in a
straight line.

Yellow stillness is on the cross-roads, yellow stillness is on the
trees. The leaves hang drooping, wan.  The four roads point four yellow
ways, saffron and gamboge ribbons to the gaze.  A little swirl of dust
blows up Tilbury road, the wind which fans it has not strength to do
more; it ceases, and the dust settles down.  A little whirl of wind
comes up Tilbury road.  It brings a sound of wheels and feet. The wind
reels a moment and faints to nothing under the sign-post. Wind again,
wheels and feet louder.  Wind again--again--again. A drop of rain,
flat into the dust.  Drop!--Drop!  Thick heavy raindrops, and a
shrieking wind bending the great trees and wrenching off their leaves.

Under the black sky, bowed and dripping with rain, up Tilbury road,
comes the procession.  A funeral procession, bound for the graveyard at
Wayfleet.  Feet and wheels--feet and wheels.  And among them one who
is carried.

The bones in the deep, still earth shiver and pull.  There is a quiver
through the rotted stake.  Then stake and bones fall together in a
little puffing of dust.

Like meshes of linked steel the rain shuts down behind the procession,
now well along the Wayfleet road.

He wavers like smoke in the buffeting wind.  His fingers blow out like
smoke, his head ripples in the gale.  Under the sign-post, in the
pouring rain, he stands, and watches another quavering figure drifting
down the Wayfleet road.  Then swiftly he streams after it.  It flickers
among the trees.  He licks out and winds about them.  Over, under,
blown, contorted.  Spindrift after spindrift; smoke following smoke.
There is a wailing through the trees, a wailing of fear, and after it
laughter--laughter--laughter, skirling up to the black sky.
Lightning jags over the funeral procession.  A heavy clap of thunder.
Then darkness and rain, and the sound of feet and wheels.





A Roxbury Garden



       I

     Hoops

   Blue and pink sashes,
   Criss-cross shoes,
   Minna and Stella run out into the garden
   To play at hoop.

   Up and down the garden-paths they race,
   In the yellow sunshine,
   Each with a big round hoop
   White as a stripped willow-wand.

   Round and round turn the hoops,
   Their diamond whiteness cleaving the yellow sunshine.
   The gravel crunches and squeaks beneath them,
   And a large pebble springs them into the air
   To go whirling for a foot or two
   Before they touch the earth again
   In a series of little jumps.

   Spring, Hoops!
   Spit out a shower of blue and white brightness.
   The little criss-cross shoes twinkle behind you,
   The pink and blue sashes flutter like flags,
   The hoop-sticks are ready to beat you.
   Turn, turn, Hoops!  In the yellow sunshine.
   Turn your stripped willow whiteness
   Along the smooth paths.

   Stella sings:
      "Round and round, rolls my hoop,
      Scarcely touching the ground,
      With a swoop,
      And a bound,
      Round and round.
      With a bumpety, crunching, scattering sound,
      Down the garden it flies;
      In our eyes
      The sun lies.
      See it spin
      Out and in;
      Through the paths it goes whirling,
      About the beds curling.
      Sway now to the loop,
      Faster, faster, my hoop.
      Round you come,
      Up you come,
      Quick and straight as before.
      Run, run, my hoop, run,
      Away from the sun."

   And the great hoop bounds along the path,
   Leaping into the wind-bright air.

   Minna sings:
      "Turn, hoop,
      Burn hoop,
      Twist and twine
      Hoop of mine.
      Flash along,
      Leap along,
      Right at the sun.
      Run, hoop, run.
      Faster and faster,
      Whirl, twirl.
      Wheel like fire,
      And spin like glass;
      Fire's no whiter
      Glass is no brighter.
      Dance,
      Prance,
      Over and over,
      About and about,
      With the top of you under,
      And the bottom at top,
      But never a stop.
      Turn about, hoop, to the tap of my stick,
      I follow behind you
      To touch and remind you.
      Burn and glitter, so white and quick,
      Round and round, to the tap of a stick."

   The hoop flies along between the flower-beds,
   Swaying the flowers with the wind of its passing.

   Beside the foxglove-border roll the hoops,
   And the little pink and white bells shake and jingle
   Up and down their tall spires;
   They roll under the snow-ball bush,
   And the ground behind them is strewn with white petals;
   They swirl round a corner,
   And jar a bee out of a Canterbury bell;
   They cast their shadows for an instant
   Over a bed of pansies,
   Catch against the spurs of a columbine,
   Jostle the quietness from a cluster of monk's-hood.
   Pat! Pat! behind them come the little criss-cross shoes,
   And the blue and pink sashes stream out in flappings of colour.

   Stella sings:
      "Hoop, hoop,
      Roll along,
      Faster bowl along,
      Hoop.
      Slow, to the turning,
      Now go!--Go!
      Quick!
      Here's the stick.
      Rat-a-tap-tap it,
      Pat it, flap it.
      Fly like a bird or a yellow-backed bee,
      See how soon you can reach that tree.
      Here is a path that is perfectly straight.
      Roll along, hoop, or we shall be late."

   Minna sings:
      "Trip about, slip about, whip about
      Hoop.
      Wheel like a top at its quickest spin,
      Then, dear hoop, we shall surely win.
      First to the greenhouse and then to the wall
      Circle and circle,
      And let the wind push you,
      Poke you,
      Brush you,
      And not let you fall.
      Whirring you round like a wreath of mist.
      Hoopety hoop,
      Twist,
      Twist."

   Tap! Tap! go the hoop-sticks,
   And the hoops bowl along under a grape arbour.
   For an instant their willow whiteness is green,
   Pale white-green.
   Then they are out in the sunshine,
   Leaving the half-formed grape clusters
   A-tremble under their big leaves.

   "I will beat you, Minna," cries Stella,
   Hitting her hoop smartly with her stick.
   "Stella, Stella, we are winning," calls Minna,
   As her hoop curves round a bed of clove-pinks.
   A humming-bird whizzes past Stella's ear,
   And two or three yellow-and-black butterflies
   Flutter, startled, out of a pillar rose.
   Round and round race the little girls
   After their great white hoops.

   Suddenly Minna stops.
   Her hoop wavers an instant,
   But she catches it up on her stick.
   "Listen, Stella!"
   Both the little girls are listening;
   And the scents of the garden rise up quietly about them.
   "It's the chaise!  It's Father!
   Perhaps he's brought us a book from Boston."
   Twinkle, twinkle, the little criss-cross shoes
   Up the garden path.
   Blue--pink--an instant, against the syringa hedge.
   But the hoops, white as stripped willow-wands,
   Lie in the grass,
   And the grasshoppers jump back and forth
   Over them.


       II

     Battledore and Shuttlecock

   The shuttlecock soars upward
   In a parabola of whiteness,
   Turns,
   And sinks to a perfect arc.
   Plat! the battledore strikes it,
   And it rises again,
   Without haste,
   Winged and curving,
   Tracing its white flight
   Against the clipped hemlock-trees.
   Plat!
   Up again,
   Orange and sparkling with sun,
   Rounding under the blue sky,
   Dropping,
   Fading to grey-green
   In the shadow of the coned hemlocks.
   "Ninety-one."  "Ninety-two."  "Ninety-three."
   The arms of the little girls
   Come up--and up--
   Precisely,
   Like mechanical toys.
   The battledores beat at nothing,
   And toss the dazzle of snow
   Off their parchment drums.
   "Ninety-four."  Plat!
   "Ninety-five."  Plat!
   Back and forth
   Goes the shuttlecock,
   Icicle-white,
   Leaping at the sharp-edged clouds,
   Overturning,
   Falling,
   Down,
   And down,
   Tinctured with pink
   From the upthrusting shine
   Of Oriental poppies.

   The little girls sway to the counting rhythm;
   Left foot,
   Right foot.
   Plat!  Plat!
   Yellow heat twines round the handles of the battledores,
   The parchment cracks with dryness;
   But the shuttlecock
   Swings slowly into the ice-blue sky,
   Heaving up on the warm air
   Like a foam-bubble on a wave,
   With feathers slanted and sustaining.
   Higher,
   Until the earth turns beneath it;
   Poised and swinging,
   With all the garden flowing beneath it,
   Scarlet, and blue, and purple, and white--
   Blurred colour reflections in rippled water--
   Changing--streaming--
   For the moment that Stella takes to lift her arm.
   Then the shuttlecock relinquishes,
   Bows,
   Descends;
   And the sharp blue spears of the air
   Thrust it to earth.

   Again it mounts,
   Stepping up on the rising scents of flowers,
   Buoyed up and under by the shining heat.
   Above the foxgloves,
   Above the guelder-roses,
   Above the greenhouse glitter,
   Till the shafts of cooler air
   Meet it,
   Deflect it,
   Reject it,
   Then down,
   Down,
   Past the greenhouse,
   Past the guelder-rose bush,
   Past the foxgloves.

   "Ninety-nine," Stella's battledore springs to the impact.
   Plunk!  Like the snap of a taut string.
   "Oh!  Minna!"
   The shuttlecock drops zigzagedly,
   Out of orbit,
   Hits the path,
   And rolls over quite still.
   Dead white feathers,
   With a weight at the end.


       III

     Garden Games

   The tall clock is striking twelve;
   And the little girls stop in the hall to watch it,
   And the big ships rocking in a half-circle
   Above the dial.
   Twelve o'clock!
   Down the side steps
   Go the little girls,
   Under their big round straw hats.
   Minna's has a pink ribbon,
   Stella's a blue,
   That is the way they know which is which.
   Twelve o'clock!
   An hour yet before dinner.
   Mother is busy in the still-room,
   And Hannah is making gingerbread.

   Slowly, with lagging steps,
   They follow the garden-path,
   Crushing a leaf of box for its acrid smell,
   Discussing what they shall do,
   And doing nothing.

   "Stella, see that grasshopper
   Climbing up the bank!
   What a jump!
   Almost as long as my arm."
   Run, children, run.
   For the grasshopper is leaping away,
   In half-circle curves,
   Shuttlecock curves,
   Over the grasses.
   Hand in hand, the little girls call to him:
      "Grandfather, grandfather gray,
      Give me molasses, or I'll throw you away."

   The grasshopper leaps into the sunlight,
   Golden-green,
   And is gone.

   "Let's catch a bee."
   Round whirl the little girls,
   And up the garden.
   Two heads are thrust among the Canterbury bells,
   Listening,
   And fingers clasp and unclasp behind backs
   In a strain of silence.

   White bells,
   Blue bells,
   Hollow and reflexed.
   Deep tunnels of blue and white dimness,
   Cool wine-tunnels for bees.
   There is a floundering and buzzing over Minna's head.

   "Bend it down, Stella.  Quick!  Quick!"
   The wide mouth of a blossom
   Is pressed together in Minna's fingers.
   The stem flies up, jiggling its flower-bells,
   And Minna holds the dark blue cup in her hand,
   With the bee
   Imprisoned in it.
   Whirr! Buzz! Bump!
   Bump! Whiz! Bang!
   BANG!!
   The blue flower tears across like paper,
   And a gold-black bee darts away in the sunshine.

   "If we could fly, we could catch him."
   The sunshine is hot on Stella's upturned face,
   As she stares after the bee.
   "We'll follow him in a dove chariot.
   Come on, Stella."
   Run, children,
   Along the red gravel paths,
   For a bee is hard to catch,
   Even with a chariot of doves.

   Tall, still, and cowled,
   Stand the monk's-hoods;
   Taller than the heads of the little girls.
   A blossom for Minna.
   A blossom for Stella.
   Off comes the cowl,
   And there is a purple-painted chariot;
   Off comes the forward petal,
   And there are two little green doves,
   With green traces tying them to the chariot.
   "Now we will get in, and fly right up to the clouds.
      Fly, Doves, up in the sky,
      With Minna and me,
      After the bee."

   Up one path,
   Down another,
   Run the little girls,
   Holding their dove chariots in front of them;
   But the bee is hidden in the trumpet of a honeysuckle,
   With his wings folded along his back.

   The dove chariots are thrown away,
   And the little girls wander slowly through the garden,
   Sucking the salvia tips,
   And squeezing the snapdragons
   To make them gape.
   "I'm so hot,
   Let's pick a pansy
   And see the little man in his bath,
   And play we're he."
   A royal bath-tub,
   Hung with purple stuffs and yellow.
   The great purple-yellow wings
   Rise up behind the little red and green man;
   The purple-yellow wings fan him,
   He dabbles his feet in cool green.
   Off with the green sheath,
   And there are two spindly legs.
   "Heigho!" sighs Minna.
   "Heigho!" sighs Stella.
   There is not a flutter of wind,
   And the sun is directly overhead.

   Along the edge of the garden
   Walk the little girls.
   Their hats, round and yellow like cheeses,
   Are dangling by the ribbons.
   The grass is a tumult of buttercups and daisies;
   Buttercups and daisies streaming away
   Up the hill.
   The garden is purple, and pink, and orange, and scarlet;
   The garden is hot with colours.
   But the meadow is only yellow, and white, and green,
   Cool, and long, and quiet.
   The little girls pick buttercups
   And hold them under each other's chins.
   "You're as gold as Grandfather's snuff-box.
   You're going to be very rich, Minna."
   "Oh-o-o!  Then I'll ask my husband to give me a pair of garnet earrings
   Just like Aunt Nancy's.
   I wonder if he will.
   I know.  We'll tell fortunes.
   That's what we'll do."
   Plump down in the meadow grass,
   Stella and Minna,
   With their round yellow hats,
   Like cheeses,
   Beside them.
   Drop,
   Drop,
   Daisy petals.
      "One I love,
      Two I love,
      Three I love I say..."
   The ground is peppered with daisy petals,
   And the little girls nibble the golden centres,
   And play it is cake.

   A bell rings.
   Dinner-time;
   And after dinner there are lessons.




1777



       I

     The Trumpet-Vine Arbour

   The throats of the little red trumpet-flowers are wide open,
   And the clangour of brass beats against the hot sunlight.
   They bray and blare at the burning sky.
   Red!  Red!  Coarse notes of red,
   Trumpeted at the blue sky.
   In long streaks of sound, molten metal,
   The vine declares itself.
   Clang!--from its red and yellow trumpets.
   Clang!--from its long, nasal trumpets,
   Splitting the sunlight into ribbons, tattered and shot with noise.

   I sit in the cool arbour, in a green-and-gold twilight.
   It is very still, for I cannot hear the trumpets,
   I only know that they are red and open,
   And that the sun above the arbour shakes with heat.
   My quill is newly mended,
   And makes fine-drawn lines with its point.
   Down the long, white paper it makes little lines,
   Just lines--up--down--criss-cross.
   My heart is strained out at the pin-point of my quill;
   It is thin and writhing like the marks of the pen.
   My hand marches to a squeaky tune,
   It marches down the paper to a squealing of fifes.
   My pen and the trumpet-flowers,
   And Washington's armies away over the smoke-tree to the Southwest.
   "Yankee Doodle," my Darling!  It is you against the British,
   Marching in your ragged shoes to batter down King George.
   What have you got in your hat?  Not a feather, I wager.
   Just a hay-straw, for it is the harvest you are fighting for.
   Hay in your hat, and the whites of their eyes for a target!
   Like Bunker Hill, two years ago, when I watched all day from the house-top
   Through Father's spy-glass.
   The red city, and the blue, bright water,
   And puffs of smoke which you made.
   Twenty miles away,
   Round by Cambridge, or over the Neck,
   But the smoke was white--white!
   To-day the trumpet-flowers are red--red--
   And I cannot see you fighting,
   But old Mr. Dimond has fled to Canada,
   And Myra sings "Yankee Doodle" at her milking.
   The red throats of the trumpets bray and clang in the sunshine,
   And the smoke-tree puffs dun blossoms into the blue air.


       II

     The City of Falling Leaves

   Leaves fall,
   Brown leaves,
   Yellow leaves streaked with brown.
   They fall,
   Flutter,
   Fall again.
   The brown leaves,
   And the streaked yellow leaves,
   Loosen on their branches
   And drift slowly downwards.
   One,
   One, two, three,
   One, two, five.
   All Venice is a falling of Autumn leaves--
   Brown,
   And yellow streaked with brown.

   "That sonnet, Abate,
   Beautiful,
   I am quite exhausted by it.
   Your phrases turn about my heart
   And stifle me to swooning.
   Open the window, I beg.
   Lord!  What a strumming of fiddles and mandolins!
   'Tis really a shame to stop indoors.
   Call my maid, or I will make you lace me yourself.
   Fie, how hot it is, not a breath of air!
   See how straight the leaves are falling.
   Marianna, I will have the yellow satin caught up with silver fringe,
   It peeps out delightfully from under a mantle.
   Am I well painted to-day, 'caro Abate mio'?
   You will be proud of me at the 'Ridotto', hey?
   Proud of being 'Cavalier Servente' to such a lady?"
   "Can you doubt it, 'Bellissima Contessa'?
   A pinch more rouge on the right cheek,
   And Venus herself shines less..."
   "You bore me, Abate,
   I vow I must change you!
   A letter, Achmet?
   Run and look out of the window, Abate.
   I will read my letter in peace."
   The little black slave with the yellow satin turban
   Gazes at his mistress with strained eyes.
   His yellow turban and black skin
   Are gorgeous--barbaric.
   The yellow satin dress with its silver flashings
   Lies on a chair
   Beside a black mantle and a black mask.
   Yellow and black,
   Gorgeous--barbaric.
   The lady reads her letter,
   And the leaves drift slowly
   Past the long windows.
   "How silly you look, my dear Abate,
   With that great brown leaf in your wig.
   Pluck it off, I beg you,
   Or I shall die of laughing."

   A yellow wall
   Aflare in the sunlight,
   Chequered with shadows,
   Shadows of vine leaves,
   Shadows of masks.
   Masks coming, printing themselves for an instant,
   Then passing on,
   More masks always replacing them.
   Masks with tricorns and rapiers sticking out behind
   Pursuing masks with plumes and high heels,
   The sunlight shining under their insteps.
   One,
   One, two,
   One, two, three,
   There is a thronging of shadows on the hot wall,
   Filigreed at the top with moving leaves.
   Yellow sunlight and black shadows,
   Yellow and black,
   Gorgeous--barbaric.
   Two masks stand together,
   And the shadow of a leaf falls through them,
   Marking the wall where they are not.
   From hat-tip to shoulder-tip,
   From elbow to sword-hilt,
   The leaf falls.
   The shadows mingle,
   Blur together,
   Slide along the wall and disappear.
   Gold of mosaics and candles,
   And night blackness lurking in the ceiling beams.
   Saint Mark's glitters with flames and reflections.
   A cloak brushes aside,
   And the yellow of satin
   Licks out over the coloured inlays of the pavement.
   Under the gold crucifixes
   There is a meeting of hands
   Reaching from black mantles.
   Sighing embraces, bold investigations,
   Hide in confessionals,
   Sheltered by the shuffling of feet.
   Gorgeous--barbaric
   In its mail of jewels and gold,
   Saint Mark's looks down at the swarm of black masks;
   And outside in the palace gardens brown leaves fall,
   Flutter,
   Fall.
   Brown,
   And yellow streaked with brown.

   Blue-black, the sky over Venice,
   With a pricking of yellow stars.
   There is no moon,
   And the waves push darkly against the prow
   Of the gondola,
   Coming from Malamocco
   And streaming toward Venice.
   It is black under the gondola hood,
   But the yellow of a satin dress
   Glares out like the eye of a watching tiger.
   Yellow compassed about with darkness,
   Yellow and black,
   Gorgeous--barbaric.
   The boatman sings,
   It is Tasso that he sings;
   The lovers seek each other beneath their mantles,
   And the gondola drifts over the lagoon, aslant to the coming dawn.
   But at Malamocco in front,
   In Venice behind,
   Fall the leaves,
   Brown,
   And yellow streaked with brown.
   They fall,
   Flutter,
   Fall.




O but stay tender, enchanted
    where wave-lengths cut you
    apart from all the rest--
    for we have found you,
    we watch the splendour of you,
    we thread throat on throat of freesia
    for your shelf.

    You are not forgot,
    O plunder of lilies,
    honey is not more sweet
    than the salt stretch of your beach.


Malmaison



I

How the slates of the roof sparkle in the sun, over there, over there,
beyond the high wall!  How quietly the Seine runs in loops and windings,
over there, over there, sliding through the green countryside!  Like
ships of the line, stately with canvas, the tall clouds pass along the
sky, over the glittering roof, over the trees, over the looped and
curving river. A breeze quivers through the linden-trees.  Roses bloom
at Malmaison. Roses!  Roses!  But the road is dusty.  Already the
Citoyenne Beauharnais wearies of her walk.  Her skin is chalked and
powdered with dust, she smells dust, and behind the wall are roses!
Roses with smooth open petals, poised above rippling leaves...  Roses
... They have told her so.  The Citoyenne Beauharnais shrugs her
shoulders and makes a little face.  She must mend her pace if she would
be back in time for dinner.  Roses indeed!  The guillotine more likely.


The tiered clouds float over Malmaison, and the slate roof sparkles in
the sun.


II

Gallop!  Gallop!  The General brooks no delay.  Make way, good people,
and scatter out of his path, you, and your hens, and your dogs, and your
children.  The General is returned from Egypt, and is come in a
'caleche' and four to visit his new property.  Throw open the gates,
you, Porter of Malmaison.  Pull off your cap, my man, this is your
master, the husband of Madame.  Faster!  Faster!  A jerk and a jingle
and they are arrived, he and she.  Madame has red eyes.  Fie!  It is for
joy at her husband's return.  Learn your place, Porter.  A gentleman
here for two months?  Fie!  Fie, then!  Since when have you taken to
gossiping. Madame may have a brother, I suppose.  That--all green, and
red, and glitter, with flesh as dark as ebony--that is a slave; a
bloodthirsty, stabbing, slashing heathen, come from the hot countries to
cure your tongue of idle whispering.


A fine afternoon it is, with tall bright clouds sailing over the trees.


"Bonaparte, mon ami, the trees are golden like my star, the star I
pinned to your destiny when I married you.  The gypsy, you remember her
prophecy! My dear friend, not here, the servants are watching; send them
away, and that flashing splendour, Roustan.  Superb--Imperial, but..
. My dear, your arm is trembling; I faint to feel it touching me!  No,
no, Bonaparte, not that--spare me that--did we not bury that last
night! You hurt me, my friend, you are so hot and strong.  Not long,
Dear, no, thank God, not long."

The looped river runs saffron, for the sun is setting.  It is getting
dark. Dark.  Darker.  In the moonlight, the slate roof shines palely
milkily white.

The roses have faded at Malmaison, nipped by the frost.  What need for
roses? Smooth, open petals--her arms.  Fragrant, outcurved
petals--her breasts. He rises like a sun above her, stooping to touch
the petals, press them wider. Eagles.  Bees.  What are they to open
roses! A little shivering breeze runs through the linden-trees, and the
tiered clouds blow across the sky like ships of the line, stately with
canvas.


III

The gates stand wide at Malmaison, stand wide all day.  The gravel of
the avenue glints under the continual rolling of wheels. An officer
gallops up with his sabre clicking; a mameluke gallops down with his
charger kicking.  'Valets de pied' run about in ones, and twos, and
groups, like swirled blown leaves.  Tramp!  Tramp!  The guard is
changing, and the grenadiers off duty lounge out of sight, ranging along
the roads toward Paris.

The slate roof sparkles in the sun, but it sparkles milkily, vaguely,
the great glass-houses put out its shining.  Glass, stone, and onyx now
for the sun's mirror.  Much has come to pass at Malmaison. New rocks and
fountains, blocks of carven marble, fluted pillars uprearing antique
temples, vases and urns in unexpected places, bridges of stone, bridges
of wood, arbours and statues, and a flood of flowers everywhere, new
flowers, rare flowers, parterre after parterre of flowers.  Indeed, the
roses bloom at Malmaison.  It is youth, youth untrammeled and advancing,
trundling a country ahead of it as though it were a hoop.  Laughter, and
spur janglings in tessellated vestibules.  Tripping of clocked and
embroidered stockings in little low-heeled shoes over smooth
grass-plots. India muslins spangled with silver patterns slide
through trees--mingle--separate--white day fireflies flashing
moon-brilliance in the shade of foliage.

"The kangaroos!  I vow, Captain, I must see the kangaroos."

"As you please, dear Lady, but I recommend the shady linden alley and
feeding the cockatoos."

"They say that Madame Bonaparte's breed of sheep is the best in all
France."

"And, oh, have you seen the enchanting little cedar she planted when the
First Consul sent home the news of the victory of Marengo?"

Picking, choosing, the chattering company flits to and fro.  Over the
trees the great clouds go, tiered, stately, like ships of the line
bright with canvas.

Prisoners'-base, and its swooping, veering, racing, giggling, bumping.
The First Consul runs plump into M. de Beauharnais and falls. But he
picks himself up smartly, and starts after M. Isabey.  Too late, M. Le
Premier Consul, Mademoiselle Hortense is out after you.  Quickly, my
dear Sir!  Stir your short legs, she is swift and eager, and as graceful
as her mother.  She is there, that other, playing too, but lightly,
warily, bearing herself with care, rather floating out upon the air than
running, never far from goal.  She is there, borne up above her guests
as something indefinably fair, a rose above periwinkles.  A blown rose,
smooth as satin, reflexed, one loosened petal hanging back and down. A
rose that undulates languorously as the breeze takes it, resting upon
its leaves in a faintness of perfume.


There are rumours about the First Consul.  Malmaison is full of women,
and Paris is only two leagues distant.  Madame Bonaparte stands on the
wooden bridge at sunset, and watches a black swan pushing the pink and
silver water in front of him as he swims, crinkling its smoothness into
pleats of changing colour with his breast. Madame Bonaparte presses
against the parapet of the bridge, and the crushed roses at her belt
melt, petal by petal, into the pink water.

The late Dr. Forrest Shreve of the Desert Laboratory in Tucson, Arizona,
stated that the principal characteristic of a desert is “deficient and
uncertain rainfall.” From our grammar school geographies we gained the
impression that a desert is a great expanse of sand piled into dunes by
the wind, without moisture or vegetation, a land of thirst, desolation,
even death.

Although sand dunes devoid of vegetation are characteristic of the
Sahara and some other deserts of the world, those of the United States
support a variety of plant and animal life which, through generations of
adaptation, are able to meet the conditions imposed by this environment
(see frontispiece). Persons who misunderstand our deserts fear them,
while others who have visited them become fascinated and return
periodically or settle down and live in them.

Some of the creatures living in deserts are known to be poisonous to
man. Western thriller fiction of press, screen, and TV has emphasized
and exaggerated this fact, developing in many people a wholly mistaken
fear of the desert and its inhabitants. In contrast, other persons may
under-estimate the possibility of injury from these animals and become
careless.

It is the purpose of this booklet to discuss accurately the various
poisonous dwellers of the desert, as well as to debunk some of the
superstitions and misunderstandings which have developed.

A majority of the poisonous creatures in the desert are by no means
restricted to that environment. Rattlesnakes, for example, so often
associated with the arid regions of the West, occur in nearly every
section of the United States.

“A poison,” states Encyclopedia Brittanica, “is a substance which, by
its direct action on the mucous membrane, tissues, or skin, or after
absorption into the circulatory system can, in the way which it is
administered, injuriously affect health or destroy life.” A poisonous
creature may be defined as one which produces a poison for the
administering of which it has developed a special mechanism.

Since, due to personal differences, the bite or sting of a poisonous
creature may injuriously affect the health of one person and not that of
another, and since the poison of one individual creature may be
insufficient to cause an unpleasant reaction, while that from several
hundred might produce severe illness or even death, it is difficult to
determine which creature should be included in a publication of this
nature. The writer, therefore, has exercised his judgment in discussing
in the following pages such creatures as he feels may offer a menace to
the welfare of a visitor to the desert. In addition, a few paragraphs
are included for the defense of several harmless desert dwellers which
are mistakenly believed poisonous and which, as a result, have been
mercilessly persecuted.


Discussing the masculine body in Stag's Leap as an act of psychotic mimesis--the inability to detach, using attachment theory and also Grosz discussion of bodies in space to theorize how the poet talks about the husband's body. 

GENERAL WORK ABOUT FEMINIST POETRY, ETC.


Feminist Measures: Sounds in Poetry and Theory. Lynne Keller and Cristanne Miller, Editors.

from the Introduction:

"Despite the popular appeal of some feminist poetry, the history of feminist criticism in the United States over the past twenty years also traces a pattern in which poetry has often seemed at odds with dominant interests in the field...Gilbert and Gubar, for example, argue that while the novelist
        sees herself from the outside, as an object, a character, a small figure in a large pattern, the lyric poet must be continually aware of herself from the inside, as a subejct, a speaker" (4).

"By presenting critical/theoretical discourse in colloquial and experimental as well as traditionally analytic forms, we also seek to interrogate the boundaries between "theoretical" and "literary" work."
(1)

REVIEWS OF OLD'S WORK

Reviews of Stag's Leap:
http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/21/stags-leap-sharon-olds-review
http://www.npr.org/2012/09/07/160696707/safe-landing-for-stags-leap
http://www.bostonglobe.com/arts/books/2012/12/23/review-stag-leap-sharon-olds
/89lXh0xbnhEeOFIL4I2mLM/story.html

EMBODIMENT THEORY AND OTHER THEORETICAL TEXTS

Bodies that Matter by Judith Butler

"To claim that discourse is formative is not to claim that it originates, causes, or exhaustively composes that which it concedes; rather, it is to claim that htere is no reference to a pure body which is not at the same time a further formation of that body. In this sense, the linguistic capacity to refer toed bodies is not denied, but the very meaning of 'referentiality' is altered. In philosophical terms, the constative claim is always to some degree performative." (10-11)

"The specular image of the body itself is in some sense the image of the Other. But it is only on the condition that the anticipated, ambiguously located body furnishes an imago and a boundary for the ego that objects come into perception. 'The object is always more or less structured as the image of the body of the subject. The reflection of the subject, its mirror stage [image speculaire], is always found somewhere in every perceptual picture [tableau peceptif]...
The idealization of the body as a spatially bounded totality, characterized by a control exercised by the gaze, is lent out to the body as its own self-control. This will become crucial to the understanding of the phallus as a privileged signifier that appear to control the significations that it produces..." (76)

(discussing Lacan):
"'What did I try to get across with the mirror stage?...The image of [man's] body is the principle of every unity he perceives in objects...all the obejcts of his world are always structured around the wandering shadow of his own ego...This extrapolating function of narcissism becomes phallogocentrism at the moment in which the aforementioned organs, engaged by the narcissistic relation, become the model or principle by which any other object or Other is known. At this point, the organs are installed as a 'privileged signifier.' Within the orbit of this emerging phallagocentrism, 'Verliebtheit [being in love] is fundamentally narcissistic. On the libidinal level, the object is only even apprehended throgh the grid of the narcissitic relation...." (77)

"Eight Women Poets" by Linda Gregorson, from Negative Capability:

On The Dead and the Living:
"The pleasures of this book--those it takes in the world and those we take in the poems--are frankly erotic….The background narrative, as in Olds's first book, belongs to family romance and coming of age. The body is her credo and her inexhaustible source of metaphor…" (36)

"Displaying a connoisseur's way with the sensuous image, an unabashed advocacy of the flesh, and a seemingly uncensored penetration of domestic life and its progressive revision of female consciousness, these poems can afford to be free with their clarity, as a beautiful woman can afford to be free with photographers." (37)

Space, TIme, and Perversion by Elizabeth Grosz.

"Psychosis is the human analogue of mimicry in the insect world (which may thus be conceived as a kind of natural psychosis?): both represent what Caillois describes as the 'depersonalization by assimilation to space.' This means that both the psychotic and the imitative insect renounce their rights, as it were, to occupy a perspectival point, instead abandoning themselves to being spatially located by/as others. The primacy of one's own perspective is replaces by the gaze of another for whom the subject is merely a point in space, and not the focal point around which an ordered space is organized. The representation of space is thus a correlate of one's ability to locate oneself as the point of origin or reference of space: the space represented is a complement of the kind of subject who occupies it" (90). 

"The subject's relation to space and time is not passive: space is not simply an empty receptacle, independent of its contents; rather, the ways in which space is perceived nd represented depend on the kinds of objects positioned 'within' it, and more particularly, the kinds of relation the subject has to those objects...For Merleau-Ponty, the subject's relation to its own body provides it with basic spatial concepts by which it can reflect on its position...These are not reflective or scientific properties of space but are effects of the necessity that we live and move in space as bodies in relation to other bodies." (93).

"If, however, post-Euclidean and post-Newtonian conceptions are made possible...these have still, in spite of their conceptual distance from Euclid and Newton, confirmed the fundamental masculinity of the knower, and left little or no room for female self-representations, and the creation of maps and models of space and time based on projections of women's experiences. It is not clear that men and women conceived of space or time in the same way, whether their experiences are neutrally presented within dominant mathematical and physics models, and what the space-time framework appropriate to women or to the twoes may be. One thing remains clear: in order to reconceive bodies, and to understand the kinds of active interrelations possible between *lived) representations of the body and (theoretical) representations of space and time, the bodies of each need to be accorded the possibility of a different space-time framework. 
        To transform the castrated, lacking, inadequate representation of female corporeality, not only do the relations between thees and the dominance of masculine in the formulation of universal models need to be questioned, the overarching context of space-time, within which bodies function and are conceived also needs serious revision. The possibility of further alternatives must be explored. This investigation, in turn, must effect the nature of ontological commitments and the ways in which subjects (masculine as well as feminine) see themselves and are socially inscribed. This may amount to a scientific and conceptual revolution alongside sociopolitical transformations, but without questioning basic notions of space and time, the inherent masculinity of the 'hard sciences' and of philosophical speculation will proliferate under the banner of the human. Women, once again, may be granted no space or time of their own. (100-101).

Volatile Bodies by Elizabeth Grosz. 
"The objective of the inversion attempted here is to displace the centrality of the mind, the psyche, interior, or consciousness (and even the unconscious) in conceptions of the subject through a reconfiguration of the body. If subjectivity is no longer conceived in binarized or dualist terms, either as the combination of mental or ceonceptual with material or physical elements or as the harmonious, unified cohesion of mind and body, then perhaps other ways of understanding corporeality,ity, and the differences between thees may be developed and explored which enable us to conceive of subjectivity in different terms than those provided by traditional philosophical and feminist understandings...
...Indeed, for feminist purposes the focus on bodies, bodies in their concrete specificities, has the added bonus of inevitably raising the question of difference in a way that mind does not. Questions of specificity, questions about which kinds of bodies, what their differences are, and what their products and consequences might be, can be directly raised in ways that may more readily demonstrate, problematize, and transform women's social subordination to men (vii-viii)...

"This project does not involve the abandonment of the terms associated with the subject's psyche or interior. It is not part of a reductionist endeavor. It does not claim that notions such as agency, reflection, consciousness--indeed, all the categories of interority--are unecessary, useless, or wrong or that these terms are capable of ready transcription into other terms. Rather, they can be remapped, refigured, in terms of models and paragidms which conceivee of subjectivity in terms of the primacy of corporeality, which regard subjectivity on the model not of latency or depth but of surface. It is for this reason that I have sought out models and conceptions of corporeality that, while nondualist as well as nonreductionist, remain committed to both a broad, nonphysicalist materialism and an acknowledgment of difference..." (viii)

"As a concept,ity is incapable of ready containment...As a set of activities and practices, it refuses to accept the containment of the bedroom or to restrict itself to only those activities which prepare for orgasmic pleasure. It is excessive, redundant, and superfluous in its languid and fervent overachieving. It always seeks more than it needs, performs excsseive actions, adn can draw any object, any fantasy, any number of subjects and combinations of thier organs, into its circuits of pleasure..." (viii)

"This book is a refiguring of the body so that it moves from the peripghery to the center of analysis, so that it can now be understood as the very 'stuff' of subjectivity. The subject, recognized as corporeal being, can no longer readily succumb to the neutralization and neutering of its specificity which has occurred to women as a consequence of women's submission under male definition. The body is the ally of difference, a key term in questioning the centrality of a number of apparently benign but nonetheless phallocentric presumptions which have hidden the cultural and intellectual effacement of women: it helps to problematize the universalist and universalizing assumptions of humanism, thorugh which women's--and all other groups'--specificities, positions, and histories are rendered irrelevant or redundantl it resists the tendency to attribute a human nature to the subject's interior, and it resists tendencies to dualism, which splits subjectivity into mutually exclusive domains. But, of course, it is not without problems of its own, major risks and dangers with which it must neogtiate and deal." (ix-x)

"The body is a most peculiar 'thing,' for it is never quite reducible to being merely a thing; nor does it ever quite manage to rise above the status of thing...If bodies are objects or things, they are like no others, for they are the centers of perspective, insight, reflection, desire, agency..." (xi)

Related to Olds being raised as a "hell-fire Calvinist" is Grosz' discussion of early Christian tradition:
"Within the Christian tradition, the separation of mind and body was correlated with the distinction between what is immortal and what is mortal. As long as the subject is alive, mind and soul form an indissoluble unity, which is perhaps best exemplified in the figure of Christ himself. Christ was a man whose soul, whose immortality, is derived from God but whose body and mortality is human." (5)

Regarding one of the ways the body is conceived post-Cartesian thought:
"In the third line of investigation, the body is commonly considered a signifying medium, a vehicle of expression, a mode of rendering public and communicable what is essentially private (ideas, thoughts, beliefs, feelings, affects)...If the subject is to gain knowledge about the external world, have any chance of making itself understood by others, or be effective in the world on such a model, the body must be seen as an unresistant pliability which minimally distorts information, or at least distorts it in a systematic and comprehensible fashion, so that its effects can be taken into account and information can be correctly retrieved. Its corporeality must be reduced to a predicatable, knowable transparency; its constitutive role in forming thoughts, feelings, emotions, and psychic representations must be ignored, as must its role as threshold between the social and the natural." (9-10).

"...two conditions necessary for a feminist reconfiguration of the notion of the body: that human bodies have irreducible neurophysiological and psychological dimensions whose relations remain unknown and that human bodies have the wonderful ability, while striving for integration and cohesion, organic and psychic wholeness, to also provide for and indeed produce fragmentations, fracturings, dislocations that orient bodies and body parts toward other bodies and body parts" (13).

"The male/female opposition has been closely allied with the mind/body opposition. Typically, feminimity is represented (either explicitly or implicitly) in one of two ways in this cross-pairing of oppositions: either mind is rendered equivalent to the masculine and body equivalent to the feminine (thus ruling out women a priori as possible subjects of knowledge, or philosophers) or each is attributed its own form of corporeality..." (14)

"If, as feminists have claimed, 'our politics start with our feelings' and if the very category of experience or feeling is itself problematized through a recognition of its ideological production--if, that is, experience is not a raw mode of access to some truth--then the body provides a point of mediation between what is external and publicly observable, a point from which to rethink the opposition between the inside and the outside, the private and the public, the self and other, and all the other binary pairs associated with the mind/body opposition." (20-21)

"The body is not opposed to culture, a resistant throwback to a natural past; it is itself a cultural, the cultural product." (23)

"Biology must be understood as psychologically pliable" (28).

"In the case of illness or pain, the effected zones of the body become enlarged and maginified in the body image…." (76)

"The corporeal or postural schema of the body is what enables us to develop a practical relation to objects in the world and a psychic attachment to our bodies and body parts. Because my body is not seen as a mere object by me, I necessarily have a different relation to it than to any other object. It is by means of my body that I am able to perceive and interrelate with objects; it is my mode of access to objects…" (92)

"Perhaps the great mystery, the great unknown, of the body comes not from the peculiarities and engimas of femaleity, from the cyclically regulated flows that emanate from women's bodies, but from the unspoken and generally unrepresented particularities of the male body. I have claimed in earlier chapters that the specificities of the masculine have always been hidden under the generality of the universal, the human. Men have functioned as if they represented masculinity only incidentally or only in moments of passion and encounter, while the rest of the time they are representatives of the human, the generic 'person.' Thus what remains unanalyzed, what men can have no distance on, is the mystery, the enigma, the unspoken of the male body" (198).



INTERVIEWS WITH OLDS/THINGS WRITTEN BY OLDS THAT ARE NOT POEMS


"A Student's Memoir of Muriel Rukeyser" by Sharon Olds, from By Herself: Women Reclaim Poetry

"Her grasp of our poems was always physical and spatial like this. And she loved to listen as we read to her--she really liked poetry! She would lean into it and listen very bodily. Sometimes when a poem especially pleased her she would smack her lips after reading it to us, as if savoring a favorite food" (349).

"Muriel was always showing us the organizing elements in modern poems: they were as 'formed' as formal work, but many traditional readers didn't recognize the forms--such as repetition--as forms. 'The light spines of the new forms,' she would say, locating long skinny poems in the framework of the body, the terms of our organic life" (351).

An Interview with "Sharon Olds" from Listen to their Voices

"Even if some intensely personal poems are never shared, Olds says, 'they have an effect on the next thing we write.' Her point is that ' speaking in a poetic voice tends to have a cumulative effect of relief and allows the poet to produce poems that might be possible to publish in some decade and not in another or to deal with subjects that it would be possible to discuss more easily at some times than others. One would, I guess, have to have great confidence and faith, and perhaps knowledge, about how one works inside, to feel free to talk about everything.'" (205)

"That sounds as if I feel that the poem is virtually written in my head or body by the time I notice that it's there. It is half formed, although I don't mean that in any mystical sense at all" (206).

"Perhaps the look of prose doesn't satisfy my sculptural lust. But a poem has a body or it has half a body. It's like the right-hand half of a Rorschach. As a little kid I looked at poems and I just loved the way they sounded. There was order." (208)

SCHOLARLY ARTICLES THAT ANALYZE OLDS SPECIFICALLY

"Body and Soul: The Power of Sharon Olds" by Vicki Feaver, from Contemporary Women's Poetry

"However, Olds is not the poet as victim, exhibiting her wounds 'to the peanut crunching crowd,' but the poet as survivor. She is more interested in describing extreme sensations of the body--in childbirth, in the ecstasy of--than in morbid states of mind." (141)

"…this couple whose tragedy she can see written in the disparity between their flawed human faces and 'beautiful,' innocent bodies…" (142)

"The words 'I loved them, too,' are immediately followed by a description of physical tension: 'I brace my body tight in the cedar house.' Earlier in the poem, she described how, as her anger is released, 'her spine uncurls'. In her subsequent work, Olds' method is almost always to rely on the power of the body to tell the story." (144)

"Her characteristic poetic method consists of 'reading' a body, or bodies, in a language that is both sensual and exploratory, that discovers meaning by making connections with other bodies and other discourses and texts." (144)

"Reading the body is a means of both discovering meaning and manipulating meaning. Even an abstration as problematic as the love between her and her father ('Love Between Us') comes under her control when it is embodied (literally 'the Word made flesh') in a being she has created." (146).

"…the act becomes the agent not only of the poet's liberation but also a model for a reversal of the received myth about power relations between male and female…" (147--The Sisters of Sexual Treasure)

"As in 'Connoisseuse of Slugs', along with the humour there is a serious reverence for men's bodies." (148)

"The wit and wonder of the poem's final revelation that 'the goodness of all we did…would find its flowering in the world'--bringing together the earlier botanical descriptions of the body's parts as well as the spiritual connotation of pearl--are arrived at by a genuine process of exploration that involves a touching of the physical body and of the body of language.
     Through the body and its acts, Olds seems to be saying, we can reach not only a transcendence that is equivalent to the transcendence claimed for religious experience but also the 'goodness' that is more usually attributed to religious than practices" (151).

"Finally, it is in her power to give her work a resonance beyond her personal story. Her nakedness in her poems is not, in the usual sense of the term, the confessional nakedness of an exhibitionist: and yet it is exhibitionist." (154)

ANALYSIS OF POEMS BY OLDS BY YOURS TRULY

Poems from stag's leap

"While He Told Me" (3)

"While he told me, I looked from small thing
to small thing, in our room, the face
of the bedside clock, the sepia postcard
of a woman bending down to a lily..." 

---- > This portion features the objectification of the space during which the "telling" of leaving takes place. Olds's speaker assigns humanoid characteristics--a "face" to the clock, an image of a woman bending down to a flower... later an image of two tulips bending apart from one another while the stems touch seems to mimic this image--the couple is the tulips in that image, but here Olds's bereft speaker is the woman reaching down to touch the lily, perhaps trying to understand what is taking place.

"Later, when we took off our clothes, I saw
his deep navel, and the cindery lichen
skin between the male breasts, and from
outside the shower curtain's terrible membrane
I called out something like flirting to him,
and he smiled. Before I turned out the light, 
he touched my face, then turned away,
then the dark..."

----> This portion highlights a continued tension throughout the rest of the book, which is that the speaker has access to the husband's body in the same intimate way that she has for the entirety of their marriage, and yet the words that are spoken between them seems to contradict this reality. So while the speaker seems to almost tenderly gaze upon the body of the husband, even the parts that don't seem that appealing, (the "deep navel", the "cindery lichen skin / between the male breasts") and "call[s] out something like flirting," the reality is still that the husband has terminated the relationship in favor of another woman, one whose image appears in a load of clothes in the washer, wrested free from the pocket of the husband later in the book.
This portion also continues to assign body-like characteristics to inanimate objects, perhaps in recongition of the new unknowability of the husband's body? The shower curtain is a "terrible membrane," folllowing up the face of the clock and the image of the woman with the lily...

Unspeakable (4)

"I feel an invisibility
like a neutron in a cloud chamber buried in a mile-long
accelorator, where what cannot
be seen is inferred by what the visible
does..."

-----> This part relates really well to what I have been thinking about in regards to the dependence of the feminine or the psychotic mimetic to rely on what is "other" to establish self, or the inability to place self spatially. The speaker no longer feels she is visible because her primary attachment has been severed. She is what cannot be seen, but somehow her fate depends on her spouse--the visible man--and his choices.

Further, the speaker is still bodily connected to the body of the husband, rendering his rejection all the more confusing and painful:

"...After the alarm goes off,
I stroke him, my hand feels like a singer
who sings along him, as if it is
his flesh that's singing, in its full range,
tenor of the higher vertebrae,
baritone, bass, contrabass..."

His "flesh" speaks to her in ways that they can no longer communicate verbally. She has a list of questions she wants to ask him that are narrated but not spoken until the final lines of the poem, where she asks about the woman who he is leaving their marriage to join. She says

"...Is this about
her, and he says, No, it's about
you, we do not speak of her."

And while the flesh of the husband speaks, he denies her his words. Yet interestingly, he does not say to the speaker that he will not talk about the other woman, but that they will not. He aligns with her as a "we," positioning them together in a cohesive unit despite the damage and destruction he has done to sever the attachment. 

"The Flurry" (6)

Once again the illusion of togetherness is implied when the speaker and her husband discuss what to tell their adult children about their divorce. The speaker feels:

'...like a killer." 'I'm
the killer"--taking my wrist--he says,
holding it..."

In a moment of connection, he touches her and takes responsibility for what they have to tell the children, but this tender moment is broken after she feels the intense familiarity of their bond:

"I am sitting on the floor. I look up at him
as if within some chamber of matedness,
some dust I carry around me. Tonight,
to breathe its Magellanic field is less
painful..."

The chamber of matedness is inhabited by a kind of "dust," yet another enclosure of space through which the body can articulate its own placement and meaning. 

"Material Ode" (7)

"...And when he came
home and shed his skin, Reader,
I slept with him, thinking it meant
he was back, his body was speaking for him,
and as it spoke, its familiar sang
from the floor, the old-boy tie..."

The speaker uses the metaphor of material--literal materials and fabrics out of which things are made to interpolate her anguished remarks about the marital dissolution. Marital/material have a not-insiginificant aural relationship, perhaps suggesting that marriage is actually not the bonding of "souls" that she references a couple of poems prior, but rather merely the binding of objects, as any other items are bound and liable to come apart completely in space--without much rhyme or reason. Her husband asks her not to come to the ball that he is attending with his colleagues (he is a psychologist, and so is his new lover) because it would bother his new paramour to see her there, and she acquieses. Yet when he returns, they have and she uses the famed "Reader, I slept with him," riffing on the "Reader, I married him" of Jane Eyre. The irony of the already-married sleeping with her spouse, in an attempt to get him back, in a vain belief that this union meant "his body was speaking for him," and this confusion relates heavily to the prior poems in which the body of the husband sends out materially different signals than he communicates on the verbal or psychological plane. The carnality of their union is indissolvable, perhaps it is the thing that is more soulful or outside of understanding--rather than their separation, their bodily union is the thing that stands outside of simple logical explanation or narration. 

"The Last Hour" (13)

"....Quickly, then, 
the worst was over, I could comfort him,
holding his heart in place from the back
and smoothing it from the front, his own
life continuing, and what had 
bound him, around his heart--and bound him
to me--now lying on and around us, 
sea-water, rust, light, shards, 
the little eternal curls of eros
beaten out straight."

"Last Look" (14-15)

"In the last minute of our marriage, I looked into
his eyes...
...And his eyes seemed to me,
still, like the first ocean, wherein 
the blue-green algae came into their early 
language, his sea-wide iris still
essential, for me...
...and I saw him, not as he really was, I was
still withou tthe strength of anger, but I 
saw him see me, even now
that dropping down into trust's affection
in his gaze...
...I was glad I had looked at him. And when I
told a friend how glad I'd been,
she said, Maybe it's like with the families
of the dead, even the families of those
who died in the Towers--that need to see
the body, no longer inhabited
by what made them the one we loved--somehow
it helps us to say goodbye to the actual..."

"Stag's Leap" (16-17)

"... It's so quiet
and empty, when he's left. I feel like a landscape,
a ground without a figure."

"...Does the old vow have to wish him happiness
in his new life, even
joy? I fear so, at first, when I still
can't tell us apart..."

"Known to Be Left" (18)

"If I pass a mirror, I turn away,
I do not want to look at her,
and she does not want to be seen. Sometiems
I don't see exactly how to go on doing this.
Often, when I feel that way,
within a few minutes I am crying, remembering
his body, or an area of it,
his backside often, a part of him
just right now to think of, lucious, not too
detailed, and his back is turned to me."

"Not Going to Him" (25)

"Minute by minute, I do not get up and just 
go to him--




