CHAPTER I.

THE AGE OF REPTILES.

ITS ANTIQUITY, DURATION AND SIGNIFICANCE IN GEOLOGIC HISTORY.


Palæontology deals with the History of Life. Its time is measured in
geologic epochs and periods, in millions of years instead of
centuries. Man, by this measure, is but a creature of yesterday--his
"forty centuries of civilization" but a passing episode. It is by
no means easy for us to adjust our perspective to the immensely long
spaces of time involved in geological evolution. We are apt to think
of all these extinct animals merely as prehistoric--to imagine them
all living at the same time and contending with our cave-dwelling
ancestors for the mastery of the earth.

In order to understand the place of the Dinosaurs in world-history, we
must first get some idea of the length of geologic periods and the
immense space of time separating one extinct fauna from another.

The Age of Man. Prehistoric time, as it is commonly understood, is
the time when barbaric and savage tribes of men inhabited the world
but before civilization began, and earlier than the written records on
which history is based. This corresponds roughly to the Pleistocene
epoch of geology; it is included along with the much shorter time
during which civilization has existed, in the latest and shortest of
the geological periods, the Quaternary. It was the age of the mammoth
and the mastodon, the megatherium and Irish deer and of other
quadrupeds large and small which are now extinct; but most of its
animals were the same species as now exist. It was marked by the great
episode of the Ice Age, when considerable parts of the earth's surface
were buried under immense accumulations of ice, remnants of which are
still with us in the icy covering of Greenland and Antarctica.

The Age of Mammals. Before this period was a very much longer
one--at least thirty times as long--during which modern quadrupeds
were slowly evolving from small and primitive ancestors into their
present variety of form and size. This is the Tertiary Period or Age
of Mammals. Through this long period we can trace step by step the
successive stages through which the ancestors of horses, camels,
elephants, rhinoceroses, etc., were gradually converted into their
present form in adaptation to their various habits and environment.
And with them were slowly evolved various kinds of quadrupeds whose
descendants do not now exist, the Titanotheres, Elotheres, Oreodonts,
etc., extinct races which have not survived to our time. Man, as such,
had not yet come into existence, nor are we able to trace any direct
and complete line of ancestry among the fossil species known to us;
but his collateral ancestors were represented by the fossil species
of monkeys and lemurs of the Tertiary period.

  

The Age of Reptiles. Preceding the Age of Mammals lies a long vista
of geologic periods of which the later ones are marked by the
dominance of Reptiles, and are grouped together as the Age of Reptiles
or Mesozoic Era. This was the reign of the Dinosaurs, and in it we are
introduced to a world of life so different from that of today that we
might well imagine ourselves upon another planet.

None of the ordinary quadrupeds with which we are familiar then
existed, nor any related to nor resembling them. But in their place
were reptiles large and small, carnivorous and herbivorous, walking,
swimming and even flying.

Crocodiles, Turtles and Sea Reptiles. The Crocodiles and Turtles of
the swamps were not so very different from their modern descendants;
there were also sea-crocodiles, sea-turtles, huge marine lizards
(Mosasaurs) with flippers instead of feet; and another group of great
marine reptiles (Plesiosaurs) somewhat like sea-turtles but with long
neck and toothed jaws and without any carapace. These various kinds of
sea-reptiles took the place of the great sea mammals of modern times
(which were evolved during the Age of Mammals); of whales and
dolphins, seals and walruses, and manatees.

Pterodactyls. The flying Reptiles or Pterosaurians, partly took the
place of birds, and most of them were of small size. Strange
bat-winged creatures, the wing membrane stretched on the enormously
elongated fourth finger, they are of all extinct reptiles the least
understood, the most difficult to reconstruct and visualize as they
were in life.

Dinosaurs. The land reptiles were chiefly Dinosaurs, a group which
flourished throughout the Age of Reptiles and became extinct at its
close. "Dinosaur" is a general term which covers as wide a variety in
size and appearance as "Quadruped" among modern animals. And the
Dinosaurs in the Age of Reptiles occupied about the same place in
nature as the larger quadrupeds do today. They have been called the
Giant Reptiles, for those we know most about were gigantic in size,
but there were also numerous smaller kinds, the smallest no larger
than a cat. All of them had short, compact bodies, long tails, and
long legs for a reptile, and instead of crawling, they walked or ran,
sometimes upon all fours, more generally upon the hind limbs, like
ostriches, the long tail balancing the weight of the body. Some modern
lizards run this way on occasion, especially if they are in a hurry.
But the bodies of lizards are too long and their limbs too small and
slender for this to be the usual mode of progress, as it seems to have
been among the Dinosaurs.

  ANIMALS OF THE AGE OF REPTILES.
    LAND REPTILES.
      DINOSAURS corresponding to the larger quadrupeds or land
        mammals of today.
      CROCODILES, LIZARDS AND TURTLES still surviving.
    SEA REPTILES.
      PLESIOSAURS   corresponding to whales, dolphins, seals,
      ICHTHYOSAURS  etc., or sea-mammals of today.
      MOSASAURS    
    FLYING REPTILES OR PTEROSAURS.
    BIRDS WITH TEETH (scarce and little known).
    PRIMITIVE MAMMALS of minute size (scarce and little known).
    FISHES and INVERTEBRATES many of them of extinct races, all
      more or less different from modern kinds.

Fishes, large and small, were common in the seas and rivers of the Age
of Reptiles but all of them were more or less different from modern
kinds, and many belonged to ancient races now rare or extinct.

The lower animals or Invertebrates were also different from those of
today, although some would not be very noticeably so at first glance.
Among molluscs, the Ammonites, related to the modern Pearly Nautilus,
are an example of a race very numerous and varied during all the
periods of the Reptilian Era, but disappearing at its close, leaving
only a few collateral descendants in the squids, cuttlefish and nautili
of the modern seas. The Brachiopods were another group of molluscs, or
rather molluscoids for they were not true molluscs, less abundant even
then than in previous ages and now surviving only in a few rare and
little known types such as the lamp-shell (Terebratulina).

Insects. The Insect life of the earlier part of the Age of Reptiles
was notable for the absence of all the higher groups and orders,
especially those adapted to feed on flowers. There were no butterflies
or moths, no bees or wasps or ants although there were plenty of
dragonflies, cockroaches, bugs and beetles. But in the latter part of
this era, all these higher orders appeared along with the flowering
plants and trees.

Plants. The vegetation in the early part of the era was very
different both from the gloomy forests of the more ancient Coal Era
and from that which prevails today. Cycads, ferns and fern-like
plants, coniferous trees, especially related to the modern
Araucaria or Norfolk Island Pine, Ginkgos still surviving in China,
and huge equisetae or horsetail rushes, still surviving in South
American swamps and with dwarfed relatives throughout the world, were
the dominant plant types of that era. The flowering plants and
deciduous trees had not appeared. But in the latter half of the era
these appeared in ever increasing multitudes, displacing the lower
types and relegating them to a subordinate position. Unlike the more
rapidly changing higher animals these ancient Mesozoic groups of
plants have not wholly disappeared, but still survive, mostly in
tropical and southern regions or as a scanty remnant in contrast with
their once varied and dominant role.

There is every reason to believe that upon the appearance of these
higher plants whose flower and fruit afforded a more concentrated and
nourishing food, depended largely the evolution of the higher animal
life both vertebrate and insect, of the Cenozoic or modern era.

FOOTNOTES:

 The records of Egypt and Chaldaea extend back at least
sixty centuries.]




CHAPTER II.

NORTH AMERICA IN THE AGE OF REPTILES.

ITS GEOGRAPHIC AND CLIMATIC CHANGES.


North America in the Age of Reptiles would have seemed almost as
strange to our eyes in its geography as in its animals and plants. The
present outlines of its coast, its mountains and valleys, its rivers
and lakes, have mostly arisen since that time. Even the more ancient
parts of the continent have been profoundly modified through the
incessant work of rain and rivers and of the waves, tending to wear
down the land surfaces, of volcanic outbursts building them up, and of
the more mysterious agencies which raise or depress vast stretches of
mountain chains or even the whole area of a continent, and which tend
on the whole so far as we can see, to restore or increase the relief
of the continents, as the action of the surface waters tends to bring
them down to or beneath the sea level.

Alternate Overflow and Emergence of Continents. In a broad way these
agencies of elevation and of erosion have caused in their age-long
struggle an alternation of periods of overflow and periods of
continental emergence during geologic time. During the periods of
overflow, great portions of the low-lying parts of the continents were
submerged, and formed extensive but comparatively shallow seas. The
mountains through long continued erosion were reduced to gentle and
uniform slopes of comparatively slight elevation. Their materials were
brought down by rivers to the sea-coast, and distributed as
sedimentary formations over the shallow interior seas or along the
margins of the continents. But this load of sediments, transferred
from the dry land to the ocean margins and shallow seas, disturbed the
balance of weight (isostasy) which normally keeps the continental
platforms above the level of the ocean basins (which as shown by
gravity measurement are underlain by materials of higher specific
gravity than the continents). In due course of time, when the strain
became sufficient, it was readjusted by earth movements of a slowness
proportioned to their vastness. These movements while tending upon the
whole to raise the continents to or sometimes beyond their former
relief, did not reverse the action of erosion agencies in detail, but
often produced new lines or areas of high elevation.

  d. Map outlines after Schuchert.]

Geologic Periods. A geologic period is the record of one of these
immense and long continued movements of alternate submergence and
elevation of the continents. It begins, therefore, and ends with a
time of emergence, and includes a long era of submergence.

These epochs of elevation are accompanied by the development of cold
climates at the poles, and elsewhere of arid conditions in the
interior of the continents. The epochs of submergence are accompanied
by a warm, humid climate, more or less uniform from the equator to the
poles.

The earth has very recently, in a geologic sense, passed through an
epoch of extreme continental elevation the maximum of which was marked
by the "Ice Age." The continents are still emerged for the most part
almost to the borders of the "continental shelf" which forms their
maximum limit. And in the icy covering of Greenland and Antarctica a
considerable portion still remains of the great ice-sheets which at
their maximum covered large parts of North America and Europe. We are
now at the beginning of a long period of slow erosion and subsidence
which, if this interpretation of the geologic record be correct, will
in the course of time reduce the mountains to plains and submerge
great parts of the lowlands beneath the ocean. As compensation for the
lesser extent of dry land we may look forward to a more genial and
favorable climate in the reduced areas that remain above water.

  als and Man.]

Length of Geologic Cycles. But these vast cycles of geographic and
climatic change will take millions of years to accomplish their
course. The brief span of human life, or even the few centuries of
recorded civilization are far too short to show any perceptible change
in climate due to this cause. The utmost stretch of a man's life will
cover perhaps one-two hundred thousandth part of a geologic period.
The time elapsed since the dawn of civilization is less than a
three-thousandth part. Of the days and hours of this geologic year,
our historic records cover but two or three minutes, our individual
lives but a fraction of a second. We must not expect to find records
of its changing seasons in human history, still less to observe them
personally.

  ic Time.]

There are indeed minor cycles of climate within this great cycle. The
great Ice Age through which the earth has so recently passed was
marked by alternations of severity and mildness of climate, of advance
and recession of the glaciers, and within these smaller cycles are
minor alternations whose effect upon the course of human history has
been shown recently by Professor Huntington ("The Pulse of Asia"). But
the great cycles of the geologic periods are of a scope far too vast
for their changes to be perceptible to us except through their
influence upon the course of evolution.

The Later Cycles of Geologic Time. The Reptilian Era opens with a
period of extreme elevation, which rivalled that of the Glacial Epoch
and was similarly accompanied by extensive glaciation of which some
traces are preserved to our day in characteristic glacial boulders,
ice scratches, and till, imbedded or inter-stratified in the strata of
the Permian age. Between these two extremes of continental emergence,
the Permian and the Pleistocene, we can trace six cycles of alternate
submergence and elevation, as shown in the diagram (Fig. 5),
representing the proportion of North America which is known to have
been above water during the six geologic periods that intervene.

From this diagram it will appear that the six cycles or periods were
by no means equal in the amount of overflow or complete recovery of
the drowned lands. The Cretacic period was marked by a much more
extensive and long continued flooding; the great plains west of the
Mississippi were mostly under water from the Gulf of Mexico to the
Arctic Ocean. The earlier overflows were neither so extensive nor so
long continued. The great uplift of the close of the Cretacic regained
permanently the great central region and united East and West, and the
overflows of the Age of Mammals were mostly limited to the South
Atlantic and Gulf coasts.

Sedimentary Formations. During the epochs of greatest overflow great
marine formations were deposited over large areas of what is now dry
land. These were followed as the land rose to sea level by extensive
marsh and delta formations, and these in turn by scattered and
fragmentary dry land deposits spread by rivers over their flood
plains. In the marine formations are found the fossil remains of the
sea-animals of the period; in the coast and delta formations are the
remains of those which inhabited the marshes and forests of the coast
regions; while the animals of the dryland, of plains and upland, left
their remains in the river-plain formations.

    America (after Schuchert).]

These last, however, fragmentary and loose and overlying the rest,
were the first to be swept away by erosion during the periods of
elevation; and of such formations in the Age of Reptiles very little,
if anything, seems to have been preserved to our day. Consequently we
know very little about the upland animals of those times, if as seems
very probable, they were more or less different from the animals of
the coast-forests and swamps. The river-plain deposits of the Age of
Mammals on the other hand, are still quite extensive, especially those
of its later epochs, and afford a fairly complete record in some parts
of the continent of the upland fauna of those regions.

Occurrence of Dinosaur Bones. Dinosaur bones are found mostly in the
great delta formations, and since those were accumulated chiefly in
the early stages of great continental elevations, it follows that our
acquaintance with Dinosaurs is mostly limited to those living at
certain epochs during the Age of Reptiles. In point of fact so far as
explorations have yet gone in this country, the Dinosaur fauna of the
close of the Jurassic and beginning of the Comanchic and that of the
later Cretacic are the only ones we know much about. The immense
interval of time that preceded, and the no less vast stretch of time
that separated them, is represented in the record of Dinosaur history
by a multitude of tracks and a few imperfect skeletons assigned to the
close of the Triassic period, and by a few fragments from formations
which may be intermediate in age between the Jurassic-Comanchic and
the late Cretacic. Consequently we cannot expect to trace among the
Dinosaurs, the gradual evolution of different races, as we can do
among the quadrupeds of the Age of Mammals.

Imperfection of the Geologic Record. The Age of Mammals in North
America presents a moving picture of the successive stages in the
evolution of modern quadrupeds; the Age of Reptiles shows (broadly
considered) two photographs representing the land vertebrates of two
long distant periods, as remote in time from each other as the later
one is remote from the present day. Of the earlier stages in the
evolution of the Dinosaurs there are but a few imperfect sketches in
this country; in Europe the picture is more complete. In the course of
time, as exploration progresses, we shall no doubt recover more
complete records. But probably we shall never have so complete a
history of the terrestrial life of the Age of Reptiles as we have of
the Age of Mammals. The records are defective, a large part of them
destroyed or forever inaccessible.




CHAPTER III.

KINDS OF DINOSAURS.

COMMON CHARACTERS AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE VARIOUS GROUPS.


In the preceding chapter we have attempted to point out the place in
nature that the Dinosaurs occupied and the conditions under which they
lived. They were the dominant land animals of their time, just as the
quadrupeds were during the Age of Mammals. Their sway endured for a
long era, estimated at nine millions of years, and about three times
as long as the period which has elapsed since their disappearance.
They survived vast changes in geography and climate, and became
extinct through a combination of causes not fully understood as yet;
probably the great changes in physical conditions at the end of the
Cretacic period, and the development of mammals and birds, more
intelligent, more active, and better adapted to the new conditions of
life, were the most important factors in their extinction.

The Dinosaurs originated, so far as we can judge, as lizard-like
reptiles with comparatively long limbs, long tails, five toes on each
foot, tipped with sharp claws, and with a complete series of sharp
pointed teeth. It would seem probable that these ancestors were more
or less bipedal, and adapted to live on dry land. They were probably
much like the modern lizards in size, appearance and habitat:

From this ancestral type the Dinosaurs evolved into a great variety of
different kinds, many of them of gigantic size, some herbivorous, some
carnivorous; some bipedal, others quadrupedal; many of them protected
by various kinds of bony armor-plates, or provided with horns or
spines; some with sharp claws, others with blunted claws or hoofs.

  about nineteen feet to the inch.]

These various kinds of Dinosaurs are customarily grouped as follows:

I. Carnivorous Dinosaurs or Theropoda. With sharp pointed teeth,
sharp claws; bipedal, with bird-like hind feet, generally
three-toed; the fore-limbs adapted for grasping or tearing, but not
for support of the body. The head is large, neck of moderate length,
body unarmored. The principal Dinosaurs of this group in America are

Allosaurus, Ornitholestes--Upper Jurassic period.

Tyrannosaurus, Deinodon, Albertosaurus, Ornithomimus--Upper Cretacic
period.

  ncipal types--Anchisaurus after Marsh, the others from
  American Museum specimens.]

II. Amphibious Dinosaurs or Sauropoda. With blunt-pointed teeth
and blunt claws, quadrupedal, with elephant-like limbs and feet, long
neck and small head. Unarmored. Principal dinosaurs of this group in
America are Brontosaurus, Diplodocus, Camarasaurus
(Morosaurus) and Brachiosaurus, all of the Upper Jurassic and
Comanchic periods.

III. Beaked Dinosaurs or Predentates. With a horny beak on the
front of the jaw, cutting or grinding teeth behind it. All
herbivorous, with pelvis of peculiar type, with hoofs instead of
claws, and many genera heavily armored. Mostly three short toes on the
hind foot, four or five on the fore foot. This group comprises animals
of very different proportions as follows:

1. Iguanodonts. Bipedal, unarmored, with a single row of serrated
cutting teeth, three-toed hind feet. Upper Jurassic, Comanchic and
Cretacic. Camptosaurus is the best known American genus.

2. Trachodonts or Duck-billed Dinosaurs. Like the Iguanodonts but
with numerous rows of small teeth set close together to form a
grinding surface. Cretacic period. Trachodon, Hadrosaurus,
Claosaurus, Saurolophus, Corythosaurus, etc.

3. Stegosaurs or Armored Dinosaurs. Quadrupedal dinosaurs with
elephantine feet, short neck, small head, body and tail armored with
massive bony plates and often with large bony spines. Teeth in a
single row, like those of Iguanodonts. Stegosaurus of the Upper
Jurassic, Ankylosaurus of the Upper Cretacic.

   chief types (Theropoda, Orthopoda, Sauropoda).]

4. Ceratopsian or Horned Dinosaurs. Quadrupedal with elephantine
feet, short neck, very large head enlarged by an enormous bony frill
covering the neck, with a pair of horns over the eyes and a single
horn in front. Teeth in a single row, but broadened out and adapted
for grinding the food. No body armor. Triceratops is the best known
type. Monoclonius, Ceratops, Torosaurus and Anchiceratops are
also of this group. All from the Cretacic period.

Classification of Dinosaurs. It is probable that the Dinosaurs are
not really a natural group or order of reptiles, although they have
been generally so considered. The Carnivorous and Amphibious Dinosaurs
in spite of their diverse appearance and habits, are rather nearly
related, while the Beaked Dinosaurs form a group apart, and may be
descendants of a different group of primitive reptiles. These
relations are most clearly seen in the construction of the pelvis (see
fig. 9). In the first two groups the pubis projects downward and
forward as it does in the majority of reptiles, and the ilium is a
high rounded plate; while in the others the pelvis is of a wholly
different type, strongly suggesting the pelvis of birds.

  chief types (Saurischia, Ornithischia) and their variations.]

Recent researches upon Triassic dinosaurs, especially by the
distinguished German savants, Friedrich von Huene, Otto Jaekel and the
late Eberhard Fraas, and the discovery of more complete specimens of
these animals, also clear up the true relationships of these
primitive dinosaurs which have mostly been referred hitherto to the
Theropoda or Megalosaurians. The following classification is somewhat
more conservative than the arrangement recently proposed by von Huene.

 as ancestral respectively to the
  Theropoda and Sauropoda.

FOOTNOTES:

 If some vast catastrophe should today blot out all the
mammalian races including man, and the birds, but leave the lizards
and other reptiles still surviving, with the lower animals and plants,
we might well expect the lizards in the course of geologic periods to
evolve into a great and varied land fauna like the Dinosaurs of the
Mesozoic Era.]

 The ancestral types have four complete toes, but in the
true Theropoda the inner digit is reduced to a small incomplete
remnant, its claw reversed and projecting at the back of the foot, as
in birds.]


As you approach Dinosaur National Monument from Jensen, Utah, you see
the mass of Split Mountain and the deep, short canyons that scar its
south slope near the Green River’s gorge. As you cross the National
Monument boundary the grand view is lost and you begin to notice
details. The masses of gray shale that seem to be carelessly piled
against the tilted sandstone layers are bare of vegetation. The ground
between the hills and the Green River is covered with sagebrush and
greasewood, while along the river itself are a few large cottonwood
trees and many bushes. A sharp turn brings a change of scene as your car
enters a portal in the wall you have been following. The pronounced tilt
of the rocks becomes more obvious.

A final steep climb and the visitor center is at hand. This building
encloses a significant part of the Dinosaur Quarry, perhaps the greatest
deposit of fossil dinosaur bones known today. From this quarry have come
many of the dinosaur skeletons that are seen today in our great museums.
After parking, a short walk to the overlook on the southeast reveals a
splendid view of Split Mountain. Between that broad arch of eroded
sandstone and the quarry lie steeply tilted sedimentary rocks of various
compositions and hues. Buff and gray sandstones that weather into soft
shapes are separated by reddish-brown shale. Directly to the east is a
section of varicolored shale whose pastel pinks, reds, greens, grays,
and whites justify the name of “rainbow beds” that was given them by
geologists. In the upper part of this section are hard sandstone and
limestone layers that resist the erosive action of wind and water. They
stand higher than the softer shales and form hogbacks that rim Split
Mountain.

One of these layers can be traced across the ravine immediately east of
the parking area into the sandstone ledge that forms the north wall of
the visitor center. This is the famous Dinosaur Ledge.




                               The Quarry


The Dinosaur Ledge is famous because here the world’s greatest store of
fossil bones of these long extinct reptiles has been uncovered. Two
groups, or orders, of dinosaurs have been discovered, with a number of
different types or kinds somewhat related to each other within these
orders. From the fossil bones, scientists can tell that these creatures
varied greatly in size and habits of living.

    were the size of chickens, others as big as horses, and others of
such gigantic size that no land animal alive today can compare with
them. Some were flesh-eaters as indicated by the size and shape of their
teeth and their long sharp claws. Others were plant-eaters and again it
is the structure of their teeth and feet that tell us this. The
flesh-eaters were two-footed and walked on their hind legs, balancing
themselves with heavy long tails. Their short front legs were used as
clawed-arms for tearing at the flesh of other dinosaurs. Many
plant-eaters, on the contrary, were large, heavy, four-footed beasts,
often with long necks and tails. Many of the dinosaurs were land
dwellers, and many others lived in the great marshes and swamps of the
long Mesozoic (middle life) Era of the earth’s history.

Though the subclass of reptiles we call dinosaurs lived all through the
Mesozoic Era, those whose fossil bones have been uncovered in this
Dinosaur Quarry are embedded in a stratum of rock called the Morrison
formation. This rock stratum dates from the Jurassic Period in the
middle of the Mesozoic Era.




                             The Dinosaurs


                           FIRST DISCOVERIES

Today, most of us would recognize a fossil bone for what it is, but in
the 1790’s things were different. Isolated legbones, vertebrae, and
teeth of huge reptiles had been dug out of certain sedimentary rocks of
Europe and North America but their scientific importance was little
understood.

These specimens were found by people in all walks of life and it was
natural that their curiosity was greatly aroused. The finders took the
specimens to someone nearby whom they considered more competent to tell
them something about these strange bones and teeth. In nearly all cases
these “experts” were doctors of medicine. They studied the fossil
specimens and reported on them at regular meetings of the learned
societies of which they were members. It was customary to put the
fossils in the collections of these societies where they could be
studied by other members. In North America most reports of these early
discoveries are found in the _Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society_ in Philadelphia, Pa.

By 1842 accumulated knowledge of these large reptiles was sufficient to
show that they were distinct from any group then known. This was first
recognized by Sir Richard Owen of the British Museum. It was he who
named the group _Dinosauria_. The name is made up of two Greek words:
_deinos_ (terrible) plus _sauras_ (lizard).

As knowledge of these unusual reptiles increased through the discovery
of additional types and more complete and better preserved specimens, it
became evident that dinosaurs were neither a single group of reptiles
nor were all of them large. Actually the dinosaurs show as much
diversity in size, body form, and habits as any group of reptiles. The
smallest dinosaur walked on its 2 hind legs like a chicken and was about
the same size. The largest walked on all 4 legs, was about 80 feet long,
and weighed 30 to 40 tons. As examples of variety in body form there are
the two-footed, flesh-eating _Antrodemus_, the armored _Stegosaurus_,
the turtle-like _Ankylosaurus_, the horned _Triceratops_, the huge
_Apatosaurus_, the two-footed vegetarian _Camptosaurus_, and the great
variety of head forms in the aquatic hadrosaurs. Although there were two
distinct groups, we still retain the term “dinosaur” as a convenient
name for all of them but qualify it by saying, flesh-eating dinosaur,
plant-eating dinosaur, armored dinosaur, etc., to indicate the
particular type we are talking about. Perhaps you are wondering how all
these ancient creatures are related to reptiles in general. Where do
they fit in the classification system devised to bring order to this
mass of knowledge?


                  POSITION OF DINOSAURS AMONG REPTILES

It seems there are several orders of reptiles similar to and closely
related to the dinosaurs. Remains of these reptiles are found in the
sedimentary rocks which contain the earliest known dinosaurs. A number
of them resembled the dinosaurs but do not quite meet the requirements
as far as details of the skeleton are concerned. In the scheme of
classification these orders of reptiles are grouped together into the
subclass _Archosauria_. This subclass includes the dinosaurs,
crocodiles, and the flying reptiles. The lizards, snakes, turtles, and
the tuatera of New Zealand belong to other subclasses of reptiles which
have been distinct from that of the dinosaurs as far back in geologic
time as we can trace them. The kinship between the dinosaurs and the
small lizards living in the monument today lies only in that both are
reptiles. The only living relatives of the dinosaurs are the alligator
and the crocodile.

The dinosaurs were so numerous, and so dominated the whole of the
Mesozoic Era, that this period of earth history is frequently referred
to as the Age of Reptiles.


                            GEOLOGIC HISTORY

The Mesozoic Era began some 200 million years ago and ended some 60
million years ago. Although many other animals lived during that era,
the dinosaurs were the dominant forms of animal life on land. The 140
million years of the Mesozoic are divided into geologic periods named
Triassic (the oldest), Jurassic, and Cretaceous (the most recent).
Continental deposits representing each of these periods have been found
in all parts of the world and on all continents. Dinosaur bones have
been found in these deposits—even in such far-away places as Australia
and the southern tip of South America. Only Jurassic dinosaurs have been
found at Dinosaur National Monument.

        OF THE HUGE DINOSAURS OF JURASSIC PERIOD. (DRAWN BY MARGARET M.
    COLBERT. COURTESY, AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY.)]

The oldest known dinosaurs are found in rocks of the Triassic Period.
The smaller of these were chicken-size and the largest were about as big
as kangaroos. All of these Triassic dinosaurs were two-footed. They can
be divided into flesh-eaters and plant-eaters, although none are
believed to have been particularly specialized in their food habits. In
general the flesh-eaters were small, agile, and had sharp teeth for
seizing and overpowering active prey. The plant-eaters were larger with
rather long front legs and small blunt teeth suited only to cropping
vegetation. These plant-eaters are believed to be the Triassic ancestors
of the giant marsh-dwelling dinosaurs of the Jurassic and Cretaceous
Periods.

A greater variety of dinosaurs lived during the Jurassic Period than in
the Triassic. Both two- and four-footed types were present. The
flesh-eaters remained two-footed but increased in size. _Antrodemus_,
perhaps the best known, was much bigger than a kangaroo. The larger
plant-eaters weighed from 30 to 40 tons and all were four-footed. The
largest land animals, they lived on dry land and in the swamps that
formed an important part of the Jurassic landscape. The first of the
armored plant-eating dinosaurs, _Stegosaurus_, inhabited the dry plains.
There were also some smaller, kangaroo-size plant-eaters that were
two-footed.

A wide variety of dinosaur fossils has been found in the rocks of the
Cretaceous Period, the last of the Mesozoic Era. The huge swamp dwellers
still thrived. The flesh-eaters had evolved much larger types and
included 40-foot _Tyrannosaurus_, the largest that ever lived. All the
flesh-eaters walked on their hind legs as did their predecessors of the
Jurassic and Triassic Periods.

New and interesting dinosaurs were present among the flesh-eaters.
Horned forms, somewhat similar to the rhinoceros but much larger, were
common. Also common were the turtle-like ankylosaurs. Perhaps the oddest
and most interesting dinosaurs of the Cretaceous were the two-footed
hadrosaurs. These excellent swimmers had weird head shapes with
complicated skull passages and openings. They were a very successful
group and at least 15 different kinds are known from the Cretaceous
rocks of North America.


                         WHAT THEY LOOKED LIKE

Ideas about the external appearances of dinosaurs have been developed
after many years of work and study. They are a combination of the ideas
of several people who had studied different specimens of a single
species. Let us review briefly the materials and work necessary to
arrive at a reasonably accurate picture of the body form and external
appearance of these strange reptiles.

The first requirement for arriving at a good idea of the build and
physical attitude of an animal is a nearly entire skeleton. We cannot
have too much of the animal’s skeleton missing or we may make a serious
error. But if the left hind leg is missing and we have the right, we are
not seriously handicapped. However, if both hind legs are missing we
must restore them according to a similar animal whose hind legs are
known.

After the nearly entire skeleton has been found it must be collected
with great care. This is a rather involved process and, for some of the
large dinosaurs, 2 or 3 months work may be required. The specimen is
first uncovered and the fossil bone is treated with a preservative such
as gum arabic, shellac, or one of the plastics. An accurate diagram of
the specimen as it lies in the rock is made on cross-ruled paper. A
trench 2 or 3 feet wide is then dug around the specimen. The depth of
the trench is determined by the width of the specimen and the nature of
the rock.

        FROM THE QUARRY.]

If the specimen is too large to take out in one piece, as most dinosaurs
are, it is divided into sections which are numbered serially as they are
taken out. Each section is bandaged in strips of burlap dipped in
plaster of Paris. After the plaster has set, the section is turned over
and the bottom is sealed with burlap and plaster. The section is labeled
with the appropriate number and the section and number are shown on the
diagram.

When all of the sections have been bandaged and numbered they are packed
in strong wooden boxes and shipped to the laboratory.

The work in the laboratory is more involved than that in the field, and
extreme care must be exercised to be sure that the bones will be
undamaged. In most cases the bones have been broken by natural causes as
they lay in the rock before discovery. All the pieces of each bone must
be thoroughly cleaned and securely cemented together. This is a very
time-consuming task and for a large dinosaur like _Apatosaurus_ it
requires 3 men 4 or 5 years to complete the task.

After all of the bones are cleaned and cemented together the vertebral
column is laid out in its proper sequence on a sand table. Special care
is exercised to be sure that the vertebrae fit correctly with each
other. In this way the correct curvature of the vertebral column is
determined. The proper relationships of the hip bones and ribs to the
vertebrae, the shoulder blade to the ribs, and elements of the limb
bones to each other are determined in the same manner. All of this work
is necessary to correctly fashion the steel framework which will support
the skeleton when it is placed on exhibition. The results of this
careful work must be the framework of an animal which could, if living,
easily go through the normal activities of life such as securing food
and escaping enemies.

Now that the framework of an animal has been set up so that it could
move about if it had muscles, skin, and life, how do we know how large
the muscles were and where they were placed? It is necessary to have a
thorough knowledge of the muscles of a recent animal similar to the one
we are restoring so that we will know what we are looking for in the
fossil. The areas at which muscles are attached to bones are called
muscle scars and are identified by their rough surfaces. Often the
necessary information can be obtained from publications which usually
represent the work done by graduate students for advanced degrees. At
other times we must make our own investigation. Thus if we know what
muscle we are looking for and the size and shape of its muscle scar, we
can determine whether the muscle is a spindle-shaped mass or a broad
sheet.

After we have determined the size and position of the muscles which
operate the limbs, head, and neck, we have a reasonably accurate idea of
the external form of the animal, but we still know nothing of the nature
of the skin which covered the body. Since dinosaurs were reptiles, we
are obliged to assume that they were covered with a scaly skin in order
to preserve the body moisture. None of the modern reptiles possess sweat
glands in the skin. If they did not possess a waterproof covering of
scales they would die in a few hours as a result of the loss of body
moisture by evaporation through the skin. It is possible that some of
the marsh dwellers like _Apatosaurus_ had naked skin which was, as in
the elephant, nearly an inch thick. The elephant does not possess sweat
glands but the outer half of its skin is composed entirely of dead cells
which form a covering as waterproof as the scales of today’s reptiles.

There have been only a few lucky finds of mummified dinosaurs which show
the impressions of the scales. We know that all lizards do not possess
the same type of scales, and therefore, by analogy, we cannot assume
that the dinosaurs did. Eventually, we will probably find that the
dinosaurs exhibited as great a variety of scale-types as do today’s
lizards. As yet we have found nothing in the fossil record which
indicates the color of the dinosaurs. Again, we can only assume that
they exhibited as great a variety of colors as do our lizards. So also,
we assume their body functions were somewhat similar to the reptiles and
other related animals we know today.

       (NOT FROM DINOSAUR QUARRY. COURTESY, AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL
    HISTORY.)]

      MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY.)]


                         TEMPERATURE TOLERANCE

We know the body temperatures of reptiles vary with that of the air or
water in which they live, as they have no means of internal temperature
control. They are very sluggish when their body temperatures are low and
become more active as these temperatures rise, but only to a certain
point. If the body temperatures of reptiles become too high, they die in
a few minutes.

A group of physiologists from Columbia University spent nearly 2 months
in southern Florida experimenting on reptiles. They determined the rate
of rise of body temperatures of large lizards and alligators of all
sizes during exposure to the midday sun. As was expected, the smaller
the reptile the more rapid the rise in body temperature. Dinosaurs were
reptiles so we can make two assumptions: That their physiology was very
similar to that of living reptiles; and that the rate of rise of their
body temperatures from exposure to the sun would follow the principles
found for living reptiles.

By applying these principles to the dinosaurs, this group of scientists
calculated that if the great bulk of an _Apatosaurus_ were exposed to
the direct rays of the sun at an air temperature of 110° F. for 36 to 40
hours, its body temperature would rise only 1° F. Therefore, if these
calculations are correct, it is probable that the very size of the huge
dinosaurs operated to maintain a fairly constant body temperature.
Consequently, daily and seasonal temperature changes probably did not
affect the activities of the large dinosaurs. However, the activities of
the small ones may have been affected by the daily range in temperature.


                             GIZZARD STONES

For many years rounded stones with a very high polish have been found in
the sedimentary rocks which contain bones of extinct reptiles. The
polish on these stones is very much higher than could have been applied
by the action of water or wind. Some look as though they had been
polished by a jeweler. Since we cannot attribute this very high polish
to wind or water action, we must seek another agent.

    BASKET. (COURTESY, AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY.)]

Just as chickens swallow fine gravel for their gizzards to aid
digestion, so it is thought that some large dinosaurs swallowed stones
for the same purpose. There is some evidence to support this idea.
Several specimens of a group of swimming reptiles, called _plesiosaurs_,
which swarmed the Jurassic and Cretaceous seas, have been found with
highly polished stones inside the rib basket. Also a mass of highly
polished stones was found similarly associated with one dinosaur,
_Protiguanodon_, in the Lower Cretaceous rocks of Mongolia.

On the other hand, no highly polished stones have been found associated
with the specimens in the Dinosaur Quarry or anywhere in the quarry. A
search of the many publications on dinosaurs has not turned up any
mention of highly polished stones being associated with any of the many
specimens found in North America. Thus the evidence which we have does
not permit us to say that the dinosaurs found in the quarry did or did
not possess gizzard stones.




           The Climate, Life, and Landscape of Jurassic Time


The geologists who attempt to reconstruct the geography and climate of
the Jurassic Period first gather all possible facts and try to fit them
together to form a logical pattern. The results are then examined for
weak points and an attempt is made to find field evidence throwing light
on these weak points. The final result represents the sum of our
knowledge at the time but is subject to change as new facts are
obtained. Thus the following outline represents present thinking that
may be changed somewhat by future studies.

The land for miles around the Dinosaur Quarry was a low-lying desert in
early Jurassic time. The mountains you see now had not yet been formed,
and the whole desert area lay close to sea level. Great restless sand
dunes drifted across this level land to form a blanket 700 feet thick.
As the earth’s crust sank, these dunes were covered by a long arm of an
arctic sea that extended southward along the present trend of the Rocky
Mountains across Canada, Montana, Wyoming, and Utah. Millions of years
later, in late Jurassic time, when the Morrison formation was deposited,
the area rose again and the stage was set for the dinosaurs.

Imagine if you can, the vast plains extending from Mexico to Canada and
from central Utah to the Mississippi River. To the west were high
mountains in the Great Basin region of Nevada and western Utah. From
these highlands flowed great sluggish streams that carried large amounts
of sand and silt. Since the plains were almost flat, swamps and small
lakes were probably numerous. The streams may have changed their courses
from time to time as they were not confined to deep valleys. When the
whole region emerged from the sea the climate became more humid.
Volcanoes were active far to the west; the winds carried clouds of
ejected dust eastward and deposited them on the plains. Semi-tropical
conditions probably existed throughout the United States and in parts of
Canada. These deposits are called the Morrison formation.

The warm humid climate provided ideal conditions for plant growth. Great
forests of lush vegetation covered the land. Many of these plants have
since disappeared, but some of their related species may be found today
in the tropics. Most of the plants of our Temperate Zone had not yet
evolved. However, there were tall stands of a type of pine, and other
evergreens. There were also gingkos and curious tree ferns.

Various herb ferns formed a ground cover as thick and lush as grass on a
well-watered prairie. Palmlike ferns resembling today’s cycads were
common, while along the river grew horsetail rushes like those living
today. Flowering plants of the Recent Epoch of geologic time (in which
we are now living) had not yet made their appearance. Thus the hardwood,
broadleaf forests of oak, elm, beech, maple, and similar trees were
absent. So too were the flowering shrubs familiar to the Temperate Zone.
Even the grasses were missing.

However, if you could picnic in this strange plant world you would soon
be slapping mosquitos and cursing the ants. For even in such ancient
times these insects were present; and so were a great variety of other
insects as is known from the more than 1,000 species that have been
discovered in Jurassic rocks. Among them were representatives of most
modern orders such as grasshoppers, beetles, moths, ants, and flies.
Jurassic insects probably looked much like those of today.

Among the most interesting of the strange reptiles were the pterosaurs
that dominated the skies. They resembled the modern bats in some ways
but their leathery wings were supported on each side by one finger
instead of four, and their skins were scaly or bare instead of hairy.
Some forms had long tails that were flattened at the tip and helped them
balance in flight, but others were tailless. Some pterosaurs were no
larger than sparrows while others had wing spans of 3 to 4 feet.

Crocodiles sunned themselves on the banks of sluggish streams and lakes.
They probably looked a good deal like those that live in modern swamps
and their habits were similar. Many a small dinosaur fell victim to
their stealthy attack and disappeared beneath the waters of some ancient
stream.

Birds have been found in Upper Jurassic rocks of Germany and may have
lived here too. Their fossil remains would probably have been classed as
reptiles had not feather imprints been a part of them. About the size of
crows, these reptile-like birds had small conical teeth, three-clawed
fingers on each wing, and a long tail instead of the fan of feathers
seen on modern birds.

Small mammals were also living at the time the Morrison formation was
being deposited and their remains have been found in the dinosaur quarry
at Como Bluff, Wyo. The largest ones were about the size of a house cat
but the majority were much smaller, probably about the size of today’s
mice.

We do not know much about the habits of these early mammals but they
were probably rather shy and retiring. This would be expected in the
world of giants where they lived. Some of them lived in trees and there
was one group whose skull characteristics resemble those of the rodents.
It is likely that these primitive mammals lived a life similar to that
of the rodents millions of years later.

This, then, was the setting, the stage upon which the dinosaurs played
their leading roles. Although we have restricted our discussion to
Morrison time in northeastern Utah, the same or similar animals lived
all over the world. Worldwide humid and mild climates produced a
similarity of plant and animal life during most of the Mesozoic Era
whose like has not been seen in the last 60 million years. It was a
strange world and ruled by strange animals, but it must have been an
interesting one.


                            HOW DO WE KNOW?

This is a good time to stop and try to explain that this story, of
plants and animals of the past, has a firm foundation in today’s
facts—it is not a fantasy.

The methods by which geologists and paleontologists have established the
age, climate, and life of Morrison time cannot be described for you here
in detail. To attempt such a description would require too much space
and would probably seem dull to most readers. Perhaps the best approach
is to describe some features and explain how they contribute to our
knowledge.

The rocks that were deposited here in Morrison time tell us much of the
story. The sandstones were once stream sandbars or perhaps beaches
around lakes. The shale, siltstone, and clay were muddy stream or lake
bottoms. The discontinuous ledges of conglomerate probably represent
gravel bars formed during flood stages or at places where the stream
currents were very swift.

Just rocks you may say—but look closely. A piece of sandstone contains
grains of sand that differ from each other in size, shape, and
composition. Frequently these characteristics point to the source of the
sandstone and tell something about the conditions at the time it was
deposited. Chunks of black material are examined closely and prove to be
charcoal—carbonized remains of plants.

Microscopic examination of clay fragments reveals shards of volcanic
glass and ash that speak of active volcanoes. Sometimes these clays bear
the carbonized imprints of delicate plants that long ago sank to the
bottom of some lake or stream where they were buried and fossilized.

The fossils themselves are most important in reconstructing conditions
of the past. We find the shells of fresh-water clams in the sandstones
with dinosaur bones. Crocodile bones are also common. We are reasonably
sure, then, that these deposits of sand and mud were formed in rivers
and lakes when the climate was mild.

We reason by analogy. For example, fossil plants and animals have
counterparts or descendants in the world of today. We assume, in the
absence of contrary evidence, that the fossil animals lived like their
present-day counterparts. Although no birds, mammals, or pterosaurs have
been found in this quarry, they were probably living here with the
dinosaurs. It is possible, in fact probable, that some modern animals
and plants live in different environments than did their Morrison
ancestors and relatives but we have no way of knowing which ones they
were. We can only take the data available, arrange them as logically as
possible, and continue the search for more. Some may scoff at such
methods of reasoning yet they do provide good results. What other
methods can be used when the world under investigation lies millions of
years in the past?




                        Animals from the Quarry


In the rocks of the Morrison formation at the quarry, both orders of
dinosaurs are found—_Saurischia_ and _Ornithischia_. Paleontologists
have divided the dinosaurs into these two groups on the basis of
important skeletal differences. These differences remain constant for
the orders and vary within each order only in small details.

The important structural difference in dinosaurs is found in the pelvis.
In all land vertebrates, the pelvis is made up of three pairs of bones
called the ilium, pubis, and ischium. The paired ilium is joined to each
side of the backbone and projects downward to meet the pubis and ischium
at the socket for the head of the thigh bone. The pubis forms the front
third and the ischium the rear third of this socket. In the order
_Saurischia_ the bones of the pelvis are arranged as in most reptiles
and mammals. In the order _Ornithischia_ the pubis extends backward
along the ischium as it does in the birds.

Two types of saurischian dinosaurs are found in the quarry.
_Antrodemus_, a flesh-eating type, was about the size of a horse, but
was two-footed. It had strong sharp claws on its feet. Its teeth were
about 2 inches long, flattened from side to side and with fine
serrations on front and back edges. Actually it is not known whether
_Antrodemus_ overpowered and killed the large swamp-living dinosaurs, or
merely fed on their carcasses after they had died from other causes.
However, there has been found in the quarries at Como, Wyo., a partial
skeleton of _Apatosaurus_ with grooves on the bones which suggest tooth
marks. The spacing of these grooves fit the spacing of the teeth of a
specimen of _Antrodemus_ found in the same quarry.

    KEY: IL—ILLIUM; IS—ISCHIUM; P—PUBIS.]

The plant-eating dinosaurs of the order _Saurischia_ which are found in
the quarry were all four-footed. They had bodies about the size of an
elephant or larger. The principal differences between the flesh- and
plant-eating dinosaurs were the length of the neck and tail, the details
of their skull structure, and other parts of their skeleton.

_Apatosaurus_ is perhaps the most familiar dinosaur to most of us. Its
hind legs were much longer than its front ones and gave the animal a
high-hipped, stooped appearance. _Apatosaurus_ was about 70 feet long
and probably weighed close to 40 tons. _Diplodocus_ was longer (one of
them 75½ feet) but was slender and lightly built. Its neck was longer
and it had a whiplash tail that looked much like the tail of the modern
whiptailed lizard. _Diplodocus_ also had long pencil-like teeth
different from those of any other known dinosaur. _Barosaurus_ has an
extremely long neck with long individual neck bones. Two members of the
genus _Camarasaurus_ are similar to each other except for size; one was
small, but the other was as large as _Apatosaurus_. _Camarasaurus_ had
longer front legs than _Apatosaurus_ and was generally better
proportioned.

      TIME. (FROM A DRAWING BY CHARLES R. KNIGHT. COURTESY, AMERICAN
    MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY.)]

    ouisae_—ABOUT 70 FEET LONG. (FROM A DRAWING BY A. AVINOFF, CARNEGIE
    MUSEUM.)]

Fossils of the saurischian plant-eaters are found much more frequently
than those of flesh-eaters and are usually in sedimentary rocks which
contain beds of clam shells. For this reason it seems probable that they
waded lagoons and streams, feeding on aquatic and bank-side vegetation.
The suggestion has been made that the larger dinosaurs could not even
walk on dry land because their weight would have crushed the bones of
their feet; they needed the buoyancy of water to help support them.
However, footprints of a huge dinosaur, much larger than any from the
quarry, have been found near Glenrose, Tex. The large footprints were
made on a sandy beach of a sea in Lower Cretaceous time. Thus we know
that they could walk on dry land if they wanted to.

All of the dinosaurs of the order _Ornithischia_ were plant-eaters, and
were of both two- and four-footed types. The two-footed types found in
the quarry are _Camptosaurus_, _Dryosaurus_, and _Laosaurus_. These
forms had well developed front legs, though much shorter than their hind
legs, which suggests that they may have dropped down on “all fours”
while feeding or resting. The teeth were small, chisel-shaped, and
fitted only for cropping vegetation. The larger specimens of
_Camptosaurus_ reached a length of 17 feet but _Laosaurus_ was only 2½
feet long.

_Stegosaurus_ is the only quadruped (four-footed) of this order found in
the quarry. It had long hind legs and very short front legs. It reached
a length of 18 to 20 feet and was 10 to 11 feet high over the hips. The
most characteristic feature of this form was the double row of bony
plates down the back and the group of spikes at the end of the tail. The
teeth were similar to those of _Camptosaurus_, but much more numerous.

Only two other groups of reptiles have been found in the quarry at
Dinosaur National Monument and their remains are rare. These are the
crocodiles and turtles. Two crocodiles are known; the larger one,
_Goniopholis_, was about the size of existing alligators and did not
differ in external appearance from present-day crocodiles. The smaller
one was less than a foot long and resembled a 2 weeks’ old alligator as
much as anything. However, we know from the texture of the surface of
the bone that it was not a young animal. The turtle, _Glyptops_, was
about the same size and general appearance as the pond turtles of today.


                              WHY SO MANY?

The partial skeletons of more than 20 individual dinosaurs and the
scattered bones of about 300 more have been discovered in the Dinosaur
Quarry. Many of the best specimens may be seen today at museums of
natural history in the larger cities of the United States and Canada.
The quarry is easily the largest and best preserved deposit of Jurassic
dinosaurs known today.

How and why did so many dinosaur skeletons accumulate here? How were
they preserved? These are among the common questions asked of park
rangers and naturalists at Dinosaur. The answer is a combination of
circumstances and luck.

Many people get the impression from the mass of bones in the quarry wall
that some catastrophe such as a volcanic explosion or a sudden flood
killed a whole herd of dinosaurs in this area. True enough this could
have happened, but it probably did not. The main reasons for thinking
otherwise are the scattered bones and the thickness of the deposit. In
other deposits where the animals were thought to have died together, the
skeletons were usually complete and often all the bones were in their
proper positions, or articulated. In a mass killing the bones would have
been deposited on the stream or lake bottom together at the same level,
but in this deposit the bones occur throughout a zone of sandstone about
12 feet thick. The mixture of swamp dwellers and dry-land types also
seems to indicate that the deposit is a mixture derived from different
sources. Rounded fragments of fossil bone have been discovered in the
quarry—fragments that attained their pebblelike shape by rolling along
the stream bottom.

If the mass of bones was not the result of catastrophe what did happen?
The quarry area is a dinosaur graveyard, not a place where they died. A
majority of the remains probably floated down an eastward flowing river
until they were stranded on a shallow sandbar. Some of them, such as the
stegosaurs, may have come from far-away dryland areas to the west.
Perhaps they drowned trying to ford a tributary stream or were washed
away during floods. Some of the swamp dwellers may have mired down on
the very sandbar that became their grave while others may have floated
for miles before being stranded.

Even today similar events take place. When floods come in the spring,
sheep, cattle, and deer are often trapped by rising waters and
frequently drown. Their bloated carcasses float downstream until the
flood recedes and leaves them stranded on a bar or shore where they lie,
frequently half buried in the sand, until they decompose. Early
travelers on the Missouri River reported that shores and bars were
frequently lined with the decomposing bodies of bison that had perished
during spring floods.

In Dinosaur National Monument, the positions in which partial skeletons
of the dinosaurs lie suggest that they decomposed on a sandbar. The
bones on the underside of a skeleton are often arranged as they were
when the animal was alive, while those on the upper or exposed side may
be scattered. Such scattering would be expected as the ligaments and
muscles holding the bones together decomposed; stream currents and
scavengers could then disperse them. Stream currents are suggested by
the position of the long, flexible tails and necks of the large plant
feeders. These, like streaming water plants in a river, trail downstream
to the east.

        BY J. G. GERMAN. COURTESY, AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY.)]


                        HOW WERE THEY PRESERVED?

The concentration and burial of dinosaur bones is only the beginning of
the fossil story. The combination of circumstances which operated here
was a common one and yet fossil quarries are rare. Why? The bones have
to be preserved and this seldom happens. The bones that are buried in
one flood are frequently unearthed and scattered by the next. Those that
are exposed to the weather usually disintegrate completely in a few
years. The bones in the Dinosaur Quarry did not.

Sometime after they were buried, the organic minerals of the bones were
more or less completely replaced by minerals of inorganic origin such as
silica. No one knows exactly why or how this happened, but it did. Most
geologists think this replacement process occurs when subsurface or
ground water containing soluble and colloidal minerals dissolves a
molecule of the bone and immediately replaces it with a new mineral.
Roughly such a process is like removing red bricks from a house and
substituting yellow. When the substitution is complete, the house still
has the same dimensions but it is composed of different materials. The
replacement was a faithful one, too, because microscopic structure of
the original bone was faithfully reproduced by the replacing minerals.

     - COLORADO
    High-resolution Map]

Following Morrison time, thousands of feet of younger sediments were
deposited on the sandbar that contained the dinosaur bones. The whole
sequence of sediments was compacted into rock and some bones were
crushed and distorted.


                         HOW WERE THEY EXPOSED?

After the sediments became rock and the bones had probably been replaced
by stone (fossilized), this part of the world, which lay near or below
sea level for millions of years, began to rise. Great forces acted upon
the earth’s crust. These forces created faults, or fractures, in the
rock crust along which movement occurred. And what had once been sea
bottom was moved upward and became lofty mountains. This titanic change
has been called the Laramide Revolution; it closed the Mesozoic Era with
the formation of the Rocky Mountains.

       PERIOD. (FROM A DRAWING BY CHARLES R. KNIGHT. COURTESY, AMERICAN
    MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY.)]

Although the effects of the Laramide Revolution were not as profound at
Dinosaur as they were east of it, they were quite important. The rocks
were lifted to form the southwest flank of Split Mountain—a small arch,
or anticline, on the south side of the Uinta Mountains. This mountain
building explains the pronounced southward tilt of the Dinosaur Ledge
and other rock layers visible in the quarry area. As the land rose,
streams flowed more rapidly, cutting deeper into the rocks and carrying
away the debris. Gradually thousands of feet of this debris—shale,
sandstone, and clay—were stripped away through erosion.

Finally all the material on top of the Morrison sandbar weathered away.
Some 140 million years after burial the fossil bones were exposed by the
agent that had buried them so long ago—running water! All that remained
was for them to be found, and that was the luckiest chance of all. Just
suppose they had been uncovered a million years ago—only a second in
geologic time. No one would have been present to discover them, and
through the years they could well have crumbled into dust and been blown
away.




                   Why Did Dinosaurs Become Extinct?


At Dinosaur National Monument only Morrison rocks of the upper Jurassic
Period contain the fossil bones of dinosaurs. After Morrison time, the
Cretaceous seas invaded this area. More than 5,000 feet of sandstone,
shale, and mudstone were formed from sediments deposited in these seas.

Elsewhere in North America and the rest of the world, the diversity and
numbers of dinosaurs actually increased. Entirely new groups evolved and
achieved success in the battle for survival. The climax of reptile
development seems to have come near the end of Cretaceous time in the
Mesozoic Era. As the dinosaurs ruled the continents, so did other
strange reptiles dominate the seas. Had you been able to see this
ancient world, you would surely have been convinced that the dinosaurs
and other reptiles would rule forever.

But it was not to be. The dinosaur hordes were wiped out and the
reptiles reduced to the position of relative insignificance they occupy
today. Such a profound and sudden change in the evolutionary trend of
life must have had a cause, and scientists have sought it. Several
theories have been proposed to explain extinction of dinosaurs, and they
are most interesting.

At the end of Cretaceous time, some of our great mountain ranges were
formed. It was a time of earthquakes and of volcanoes that belched forth
clouds of ash and rivers of molten rock. Some people would say these
catastrophic events killed all the dinosaurs. The scientist shakes his
head. If these events killed dinosaurs, why not the other animals that
lived with the dinosaurs. And what of those parts of the world that had
no volcanoes, what killed dinosaurs there?

Changes in environments, the drainage of lakes and swamps as young
mountains rose, changes in vegetation as new plants replaced old, and
sudden shifts of climate occurred. These conditions could explain local
extinction, but there were places where these changes did not occur and
yet all dinosaurs in all places died.

A one-time favorite theory suggested that increasing numbers of small
mammals ate dinosaur eggs, but there were many mammals eating dinosaur
eggs during all of Cretaceous time and the dinosaur hordes increased.
Many more mammals during succeeding ages have not killed off the
turtles, snakes, lizards, and crocodiles that lay eggs and exist in
great numbers today.

Some disease or combination of plagues may have swept the dinosaurs into
extinction. If so, no evidence has been found to date that confirms or
denies. However, most paleontologists do not accept this theory.

These are some of the theories that have been advanced to explain the
sudden extinction of dinosaurs throughout the world. Each theory will
explain the death of some dinosaurs in some places but attempts to apply
any of them, or combinations of them, to worldwide extinction have
failed.

This dinosaur story is like a mystery thriller with the last pages torn
out. A most important part is missing. That is true and the
paleontologist knows it. He also knows the riddle will probably never be
solved. He might point out, however, that no one has successfully
explained the extinction of the passenger pigeon which occurred quite
recently, nor do we know why some other species of wildlife are on the
brink of extinction today. The paleontologist is not the only one who
must say, “I don’t know.”




                 History and Development of the Quarry


                       DISCOVERY AND EARLY YEARS

No one knows how long the old bones had been weathering out of the hills
of what is now Dinosaur National Monument before the first man saw them.
Curious Indians, wandering between the upturned ridges of Mesozoic
rocks, picked up fragments and carried them off to their camps where
they are now found among the arrow points, ax heads, and corn-grinding
stones. In 1776, the Spaniard, Father Escalante, passed within sight of
today’s dinosaur quarry, not dreaming of the antiquity hidden there.
Maj. John Wesley Powell, on his second voyage down the Green River in
1871, recorded the presence of “reptilian remains” in the area, but
wrote nothing more about them. Sheepherders, cattlemen, and hunters
observed them and were impressed in proportion to their understanding.
But, through all the years, the nature of the bones remained a mystery.

    Then, in 1893, this mystery was solved. O. A. Peterson, a scientist from
the American Museum of Natural History, while conducting field work in
the Uinta Basin to the south of the present monument boundaries,
discovered bones out-cropping from a recognized fossil-bearing stratum.
The stratum was the 140,000,000 year-old Morrison formation. The bones?
Peterson reported them as the remains of dinosaurs.

That report was to have an important influence, 15 years later, in
directing a fellow paleontologist from the Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh
to investigate the area. Earl Douglass was the paleontologist’s name. In
1908, he and W. J. Holland, Director of the Carnegie Museum, found
themselves in the region of Peterson’s discovery, searching for dinosaur
remains. They extended their search to the north and thence along the
Morrison hogback that flanks Split Mountain. Bone was found—not much,
but enough to bring Douglass back the following summer and in company
with George Goodrich, a local resident, to pursue the hunt.

The hunt came to a triumphant climax on August 17, 1909, when—to quote
from Douglass’s diary—“At last in the top of the ledge where the softer
overlying beds form a divide ... I saw eight of the tail bones of a
_Brontosaurus {Apatosaurus}_ in exact position.”


                          STARTING THE QUARRY

This was the beginning—the beginning of the celebrated dinosaur quarry
which was to yield such a multitude and variety of ancient forms to
science, and eventually lead to the establishment of Dinosaur National
Monument.

Douglass proceeded to dig into the solid rock along those original eight
tail bones and found other parts of the skeleton. In time, the almost
complete frame of the _Apatosaurus_ was exposed. The skull was missing
and parts of the limb bones, but this was to be expected, as fossil
vertebrates are rarely preserved in their entirety. What was not
expected were the remains of a smaller dinosaur comingled with those of
its huge contemporary.


                   EXTENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIND

Douglass was elated. This was more than a “one strike”! How much more,
only further digging would tell. Sensing a large-scale operation, he
informed the Carnegie Museum of his prospects and readied things with
the intensity of a man at the gate of destiny. From the neighboring
ranches he recruited men, horses, and equipment. He sent for his wife
and child. He constructed a road to the discovery site, built a
five-room cabin out of logs and lumber, converted a sheepherder’s camp
wagon into an office, selected ground for future planting, bought a cow.
A forge was set up. Tools were purchased.

Back at the museum, Andrew Carnegie, himself, evinced interest. He had
always wanted something “as big as a barn” for his institution. A
special annual field fund of $5,000 was added to the regular budget to
carry on the work.

Within a year, Douglass and his men had run a cut over a hundred feet
long in the hard sandstone, digging down along the almost perpendicular
slant of the rock. At the base of this, rails were laid and small mine
carts introduced to haul away the cuttings from the rapidly developing
quarry.

New specimens appeared: A small plant-eating dinosaur known as
_Dryosaurus_; an armored form called _Stegosaurus_; and another large
creature like the _Apatosaurus_. Best of all, the _Apatosaurus_ No. 1
was well on its way out of the rock and would soon be ready to ship to
the Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh.

    aurus_ IN EXACT POSITION.” (FROM DOUGLASS’ DIARY, 1909.
    SHOWN IN PHOTO IS DOUGLASS’ ASSISTANT, ELDER GOODRICH.)]

       (COURTESY, A. S. COGGESHALL.)]

    OVERED IN THE QUARRY. THIGH BONE NEAR MAN. (COURTESY, A. S.
    COGGESHALL.)]

    R
    CENTER. (COURTESY, A. S. COGGESHALL.)]

In 1913, after 3 years of laboratory work in the Carnegie Museum the big
_Apatosaurus_ was on its feet in the Hall of Vertebrate Paleontology—1
of the 4 mounted specimens of this genus in the country and the most
perfect of all. Prepared and erected by Arthur S. Coggeshall and his
associates, it measures 71½ feet long and stands 15 feet tall at the
arch of the back.

As the excavating progressed it was not long before the diggings became
what is known to the profession as a “general quarry.” Dinosaurs of “all
kinds and sizes” were showing up. Other quarries of this type had been
developed in previous years in the Morrison formation at Como Bluff,
Wyo., and Canon City, Colo., but they contained nothing like the variety
of forms found here. Moreover, these at the monument were better
preserved and the skeletons more intact.

The remains most frequently encountered in the diggings were those of
sauropods—the huge plant-feeding dinosaurs with long tapering
extremities that lumbered about on four pillar-like legs. _Camarasaurus_
and the larger _Apatosaurus_ were typical members of this group, and
their numerous bones show them as being common animals of their time.

More common were the _Diplodoci_, of the exaggerated neck and even
longer whiplash tail. This genus distinguished itself by producing not
only the largest amount of skeletal material from the quarry, but also
the largest number of skulls—those rarest of fossils. One skull was
found in exact position with the neck bones, which settled all doubts as
to the details of this animal’s head piece. The longest _Diplodocus_ to
come from the monument extended 75½ feet.

Contrast this with the diminutive _Laosaurus_, a 2½-foot biped which
ranks as the smallest dinosaur yet taken from the deposit. This tiny
creature had hollow limb bones and was one of the agile, quick-running
types. Only one was found. When discovered, Douglass thought it a “baby”
dinosaur, but study proved it to be a full-grown specimen. The condition
of the skeleton reflected considerable agitation before and after
burial. It lay on its back, the limbs distended. The tail was gone and
the skull crushed.

In many respects, the most interesting dinosaur found was the sauropod,
_Barosaurus_. It was an extremely long-necked form, some of the
individual cervical vertebrae measuring 3 feet in length. Two specimens
were excavated.

The flesh-eaters, as might be expected from their scarcity in other
localities, made but a small showing. Two specimens of _Antrodemus_ were
unearthed. Thirty feet long, this animal was the ranking predator of its
day, although hardly comparable to the towering _Tyrannosaurus_ that
entered upon the earthly scene at a later age.

_Stegosaurus_ remains—so abundant that Douglass grew tired of them—added
a bizarre note. An armored form, it was equipped with a frill of bony
plates that extended the length of the back and terminated in a pair of
sharp spines. Its chief claim to fame rests in its supposed two sets of
“brains,” one a motor-control center situated in the hip region, and the
other in the usual place.

Everywhere they dug, the excavators found fresh material—a vast jumble
of bones so concentrated and intermingled as to make it difficult to
distinguish one specimen from another. Douglass was amazed. Obviously,
it was not with animals of a single area that he was dealing, but of an
entire region. He was dealing with a dinosaur _fauna_. He was also
perplexed. How did so many different types happen to occur in one small
locality?

Slowly, as Douglass’s acquaintance with the deposit grew, the answer
came. It was, he reasoned, the work of a river. The sandstones were
ancient sediments. In their structure and composition lay the story of
swift swirling currents. The coarse granular texture told of fast water;
the crossbedding, of shifting channels; the grouping of the bones into
clusters, of eddies.

It all added up to an old delta deposit at the mouth of a river, a
region of bars where the carcasses of dinosaurs brought down stream
accumulated. Settling, the great hulks became buried as they sank into
the receptive sand. A number of carcasses multiplied ... and slowly, as
flesh and ligament decayed, the bones became mingled, eventually to
petrify and remain preserved through the ages.


                              WORK METHODS

At the quarry, excavating continued summer and winter. The methods
employed were those that paleontologists had used for decades. There was
no compressed air, no labor-saving devices. The work was done by hand.
The crew, which seldom exceeded four men at any one time, became
veterans in the art of fossil extraction. The bone was brittle; the
encasing sandstone, hard. It required toil, patient direction, and a
knowledge of anatomy.

Judiciously placed charges of giant powder shattered the overburden.
Hand drills, wedge-and-feather, and crowbar worked the rock away, until
the bone layer was encountered. The slow attrition by hammer and chisel
accomplished the final delicate separation of the remains from the
enclosing matrix. Team-and-scraper and small handcarts removed the
rubble that swiftly accumulated in the cut. As the bones were chiseled
from the quarry face in large blocks of rock, they were encased in
strips of burlap dipped in flour paste. (Later, plaster of Paris
supplanted the flour paste.) Then they were lowered by rope onto a
mule-drawn skid and “snaked” down the trail into the gulch to await
boxing.

     DURING THE CARNEGIE MUSEUM OPERATIONS. (COURTESY, A. S.
    COGGESHALL.)]

    E
    CARNEGIE MUSEUM OPERATIONS. (COURTESY, A. S. COGGESHALL.)]

Transporting the fossils from quarry to railhead was a major
undertaking. It required wagon trains—4-horse teams hauling high-wheeled
freight wagons over 60 miles of rutted roads to Dragon, Utah. There the
precious goods were loaded onto boxcars of the now abandoned narrow
gauge Uintah Railway, later to be transhipped to the standard gauge
Denver & Rio Grande line at Mack, Colo.


                          FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

Specimens continued to show in record abundance, most of them
duplicating the earlier finds of _Diplodocus_ and _Stegosaurus_. But
there were new forms, too. One of them was a _Camptosaurus_, the first
to be found at the quarry. It was a modified biped of plant-eating
habits, a little more than 10 feet long, with its skull and part of the
tail missing.

By 1921 the deposit had been worked to a length of 400 feet east and
west, and to a depth of about 60 feet. Rock was being stripped from the
quarry face at the rate of approximately 20,000 cubic feet annually, and
the chisels of Douglass and his men had penetrated to the richest
bone-bearing zone.

In the following year they uncovered one of the most perfect skeletons
of a dinosaur ever exhumed. It was a small sauropod named, _Camarasaurus
lentus_. When found, its 17-foot vertebral column was practically
intact, except for a few tail segments. The skull was in place, and the
limbs in their approximate positions.

It was an important find scientifically. The position of the limbs gave
clear evidence of the manner in which these animals carried themselves.
The articulation between the thigh bone and the pelvis showed
conclusively that sauropods walked with their legs more-or-less vertical
to the body and not with the bowed-out crawling posture habitual to
lizards, as many scientists had supposed. The skull was the finest known
for this genus. It was complete even to the sclerotic ring—a complex of
bony plates which surrounded the living eye and protected it.

As exhibit material it was without rival. It was mounted as found, lying
on its side, the bones fixed in death in the matrix in which they had
been preserved—a fitting climax to the 13 consecutive years that had
seen an unknown sandstone ridge in Utah become Dinosaur National
Monument.

In those 13 years the Carnegie Museum had taken from the quarry parts of
300 dinosaur specimens, 2 dozen of which were mountable skeletons. Ten
different species were represented. It was the best collection of Middle
Mesozoic monsters in the world.

In the years that immediately followed, the still-rich “dig” was worked
by two other organizations—the Smithsonian Institution and the
University of Utah.

    M
    THE QUARRY. (COURTESY, CARNEGIE MUSEUM.)]

But finally the museums had reaped their harvest. The fruits of the
harvest had gone to enrich many of their finest displays. However, still
buried in the untouched part of the wall were the remains of still more
dinosaurs. All that was needed was to reveal them. The 67° tilt of the
rock made it a perfect exhibit face. Strip off the overlying layers,
expose the skeletons, and relief them in place. This had been Douglass’s
idea as far back as 1915, when he recorded it in his diary.


                         PROTECTING THE QUARRY

But Douglass was not the only one to realize the necessity of preserving
this unique fossil record of the dinosaurs for people of today and the
future to see on the spot. Officials of the Carnegie Museum realized the
extraordinary nature of the deposits and their contribution to our
knowledge of the past; and they were not long in taking steps to protect
the dinosaur quarry. To preserve it for science, they sought to lay
claim to it as a mineral property. But their claim was disallowed by the
U. S. Department of the Interior, because fossil bones could not be
classed as a mineral within the meaning of the mining laws.

The museum pressed its case, this time with results—but not what they
expected. The outcome was not the establishment of a mere mineral claim,
but of a national monument. Under the provisions of the Antiquities Act,
to safeguard and preserve objects and areas of significant scientific or
historic interest, the dinosaur quarry and 80 acres of surrounding land
were declared a national monument on October 4, 1915. Less than a year
later it was included in the newly created National Park System.

Several things contributed notably to this action to protect the quarry.
They were: the exceptional preservation of the bones; the number,
variety and completeness of the skeletons; the relative abundance of
skulls, consisting of 8 or more in a complete state, and about an equal
number of incomplete ones; and the finding of the first complete tails.

In 1923, knowing that the quarry was protected, and that the scientific
collection of the fossil bones for museum exhibit was at an end, Earl
Douglass turned again to the idea of making a perfected exhibit of the
fossils right where they lie. His letter to Dr. Walcott, secretary of
the Smithsonian Institution, reads, in part, “I hope that the
Government, for the benefit of science and the people, will uncover a
large area, leave the bones and skeletons in relief and house them in.
It would make one of the most astounding and instructive sights
imaginable.”

    SITE.]

This is precisely what the Government had in mind and, through the
agency of the National Park Service, intended to accomplish. Plans for
an in-place exhibit were drawn up. But many years were to elapse before
the plans passed from blueprint into reality.

In the meantime, the quarry entered the second phase of its existence, a
dormant period from a scientific viewpoint, but one in which the forces
of the future gathered ground.

During the 1930’s the monument served as a transient camp. A. C. Boyle
was installed as resident geologist and custodian for the Park Service.
Under his guidance a program for the general development of the area was
carried on, financed largely by WPA funds. This entailed, among other
things, the deepening and widening of the quarry cut, and the
construction of buildings later to accommodate the monument staff and
exhibits.

The American Museum of Natural History became interested in the
development at this time and, through its curator of fossil reptiles,
Barnum Brown, sought to initiate a joint effort with the Park Service
for exhibiting the quarry remains.


                          PRESENT DEVELOPMENT

It was not until September 1953 that the years of Park Service planning
bore fruit, and the work of developing an in-place exhibit for the
monument was begun. Many factors operated to spring the project into
being, not the least of which was the active interest and wholehearted
support of Horace M. Albright, a former Director of the Service.

Theodore E. White, formerly with the Smithsonian Institution and with
Harvard University, was placed in immediate charge, under the
supervision of Jess H. Lombard, the superintendent of the National
Monument. His task, and that of his associates, was to expose the
remaining specimens in the quarry wall and work them out in bas-relief.

A shelter had been built over the working space and power tools were
introduced for the first time. Using compressed air, the rock was scaled
off with jackhammers and “paving-breakers,” until most of the overburden
had been removed. Subsequent probing into the bone layer was done with
smaller chipping hammers, mallet, and chisel. This operation continued
through 1954 and 1955 as, slowly and carefully, the extent of the
skeletal material was determined. It comprised parts of several large
dinosaurs, sufficient in quantity to justify the next step—the
construction of a building to enclose the quarry face.

Erection of this unusual structure, the first of its design to be
attempted, commenced in 1957 and it was opened to the public in the
following year. Now, as one of the many development projects in its
MISSION 66 program, the National Park Service has resumed the delicate
work of uncovering this corner of the ancient world and preserving it
in-place for all time.




                            The Scene Today


If you stand at the overlook, you will see the Green River, Split
Mountain, and a rolling plain to the south that stretches to a hazy line
of mountains. To many, it is an unfamiliar land that lies strangely
subdued beneath a blazing sun and an intensely blue sky.

That blue sky is the key to the kinds of plants and animals that live in
this part of the monument. They live most of their lives under blue sky,
and, even when clouds do form over the mountains and drift across the
lowlands, the results are disappointing. A high wind, dust and sand, a
few drops of rain, and the storm is over.

The climatic conditions under which local plants and animals live are
conditions of extremes. On summer days the temperatures may rise above
100°, although the nights are usually cool. During the winter,
temperatures may skid to 30° below zero or more. It is not uncommon for
the thermometer to remain below zero for weeks on end. But the most
influential climatic factor is water—and there is little of it. The
total yearly precipitation is a little less than 8 inches! It is
interesting then to find such a wide variety of plants and animals that
not only survive but flourish under such rigorous conditions.

The methods used by plants in adapting to arid conditions are
interesting and varied. The wide-spreading, shallow root system and
thick stem of the cactus enhance collection and storage of water. These
strange plants are quite plump with stored water in the spring when the
snows melt, but they gradually lose this plumpness during the dry
summer, and by autumn many seem lifeless.

Other plants conserve their water by minimizing the loss through their
leaves. This may be done in a number of ways. The leaves of the spiny
greasewood are covered with a waxy substance that inhibits water loss
while the leaves of the sagebrush are covered with hairs or fuzz that
serve the same function. The leaves of the juniper are scale-like and
really don’t look like leaves at all. The most direct method of
preventing water loss through leaves is to drop the leaves themselves,
and this method is used to a greater or lesser degree by many desert
plants. The serviceberry is a good example of this method. In late
summer it looks dead, and yet the following spring finds it robed in
green and covered with flowers.

In contrast to the frugal habits of the plants just described, the
cottonwoods seem lavish indeed. Usually big trees, they spread a canopy
of green in whose shade rest birds and animals alike. Have you ever
rested under a cottonwood? If so, you will remember it as being cool
even on the hottest days. Part of the coolness was due to the hundreds
of gallons of water which are transpired through the leaves each day.
Because cottonwoods require so much water, they usually grow along
streams or near springs. Frequently they are seen along dry ravines
where their thirsty roots tap the subsurface drainage that lies hidden
below. Like the other plants however, when the supply of water becomes
inadequate they shed their leaves and wait for the next spring. Fast
growing, usually of large size, and wasteful of water where water is
dear, the cottonwood seldom lives two hundred years while the twisted
juniper on the dry, rocky ledge frequently lives as much as five
hundred.

    f the year are the flowering plants. Some of
these are annuals—plants that grow from seeds, mature, bloom, produce
seeds, and die in the span of a few short weeks. When the snows melt and
the sun warms the earth, the seeds that survived the winter germinate.
The usually barren hillsides produce spots of green that soon spread to
form patches as more and more plants mature. Lupine and locoweed are
purple and heliotrope splashes color along the roads, while the
fragrant, white, evening-primrose dots the sandy hillside. Scarlet gilia
and Indian paintbrush add a touch of red to the scene, and orange is
provided by the mallow.

April, May, and early June provide the best flower show as spring rains
supplement the moisture from melted snow. Their races won, their seeds
produced, the annuals wither and fade away as the temperatures rise. By
the first of July little remains of the splendid show.

Two plants do brighten the desert scene in August and September. Most
common is the rabbitbrush, a plant that grows almost everywhere. It is
rather inconspicuous except in late summer when its brilliant yellow
blossoms turn the whole shrub golden. The other is the bee plant of
which there are two species: one has yellow blossoms, and the other has
purple. These tall plants grow along washes, stream courses, roads, and
irrigation ditches. Their delicate blossoms are always surrounded by
insects drawn by the nectar the flowers produce in great quantities.

These, then, are a few of the typical plants. Each has adjusted its
needs to those limiting factors—winter cold, summer heat, and aridity. A
great number of plants grow on the monument that have not been mentioned
here, but they are like the typical plants and have similar ways of
meeting the problems of survival.

Many people who profess an interest in nature admit they cannot get very
excited about plants. Such disinterest may result in minimizing the
importance of plants in the general scheme of nature. That would be a
major error. The plants of the world are the foundation upon which other
forms of life are dependent. They alone are able to utilize the minerals
in the soil and convert carbon dioxide and water to carbohydrates.
Because of these abilities, the parade of life has been able to advance
only when the plants advance. In the present as in the past, the kinds
and abundance of plants set definite limits as to the species and
numbers of animals an area may support. Thus, if man changes the plants
of an area he will surely change the animals too, whether he realizes it
or not.

If you drive to the quarry in the heat of the day you will see only a
few of the birds that live here. They don’t like to hunt their food
during those hot hours. Frequently a turkey vulture sails majestically
above the plains along the Green River. Sometimes so high he appears to
be a speck, his telescopic eye searches the ground for the carrion upon
which he feeds. Another bird that does not mind the heat is Say’s
phoebe. He is usually found perched on a fence post, a wire, or a dead
branch waiting for some insect to buzz by. A graceful, short flight, a
pop of his beak, and then back to his perch to repeat the cycle again.
As he sits motionless, his gray breast and darker gray head and back
make him hard to see.

The time to watch birds is in the evening; as the sun sinks and the air
cools, they come forth. Small gray-brown rock wrens hop among the
boulders near the visitor center. Robins scurry through the leaves in
the stream course below the Dinosaur Quarry. Here too, western
flycatchers and Audubon’s warblers search among the cottonwoods for
insects. A flash of red and white is seen as a red-shafted flicker darts
from its nest in the hollow trunk of a tree. The sky is filled with
wheeling, twittering rough-winged swallows and white-throated swifts
that descend from their nests on the cliffs to feed upon the gnats and
other flying insects.

These are the birds that spend the spring and summer here. They raise
their families and, young and old alike, depart in autumn when frost
kills the insects upon which they feed. As they flee the cold of winter,
they are joined by many other birds that make their summer homes at
higher elevations or more northern latitudes. Ducks, geese, and swans
join the hordes moving southward. So do the various shore birds,
bluebirds, and hummingbirds.

But the sagebrush flats and brushy ravines are not left vacant by this
wholesale migration, for as the summer residents move out the winter
residents move in. The Oregon and gray-headed juncos spend the entire
winter here. Great flocks of mountain bluebirds descend from the
mountains and piñon jays make the hills resound with their screams.
Canada geese and golden-eye ducks live on the Green River and remain
until it freezes. The harsh croak of the raven is seldom heard in summer
but often in winter.

Few birds live here in winter and summer—the golden and bald eagles, the
red-tailed hawk, and the little sparrow hawk. Perhaps the most handsome
year-round resident is the magpie with its long, iridescent tail, black
and white body, and white patches on its wings. One other resident makes
his presence known by his eerie cry on frosty, moonlit nights—the
western horned owl. He hunts every night, summer and winter, but is
seldom seen. Occasionally he is disturbed upon his daylight roost and as
he skillfully dodges through the junipers, he makes a joke of the story
that owls don’t see well in daylight.

The mammals that live in the vicinity of the Dinosaur Quarry are almost
never seen. There are several reasons for this—almost all of them are
nocturnal, are very shy, and most of them are small.

In spite of their retiring habits, they reveal their presence in a
number of ways. Patches of bare earth under sagebrush and nearby sandy
slopes are crisscrossed with tiny paths beaten into the dust by deer
mice. Along the river bank, gnawed tree stumps, a few fresh chips, and
perhaps a webbed footprint tell us beaver have been active during the
night. The paired hind footprints of the kangaroo rat are common on the
hillside. Freshly fallen snow records the preceding night’s activities
in perfect detail.

     golden-mantled ground squirrels, our evidence of
mammals would be mostly indirect. But these little fellows are very much
in evidence all day long as they play around the visitor center and in
the picnic areas. They are handsome too, with their alert black eyes,
cinnamon neck and shoulders, and dark side patches with white stripes.
Most people call these ground squirrels chipmunks because both are
striped. Actually the two are easy to tell apart; the chipmunk’s stripes
run to the tip of its nose, but those of the golden-mantled ground
squirrel extend forward only to the shoulder region. Any small, striped
mammal seen near the quarry is probably a ground squirrel, as chipmunks
are rare here.

The water problem is an ever-present one for the mammals as well as the
plants. At first this may seem strange with the Green River so close and
several springs in the hills, but most of the smaller animals have very
restricted ranges. A deer mouse, for example, seldom travels more than
100 feet from his home burrow in his entire lifetime. The kangaroo rat
and the desert woodrat also have limited ranges although theirs are
somewhat larger than those of deer mice. The majority of such animals
must meet their water needs without springs and seeps. How do they do
it?

CHAPTER IV.

THE CARNIVOROUS DINOSAURS, ALLOSAURUS, TYRANNOSAURUS,
ORNITHOLESTES, ETC.

SUB-ORDER THEROPODA.


The sharp teeth, compressed and serrated like a palaeolithic spear
point, and the powerful sharp-pointed curved claws on the feet, prove
the carnivorous habits of these dinosaurs. The well-finished joints,
dense texture of the hollow bones and strongly marked muscle-scars
indicate that they were active and powerful beasts of prey. They range
from small slender animals up to the gigantic Tyrannosaurus
equalling the modern elephant in bulk. They were half lizard, half
bird in proportions, combining the head, the short neck and small fore
limbs and long snaky tail of the lizard with the short, compact body,
long powerful hind limbs and three-toed feet of the bird. The skin was
probably either naked or covered with horny scales as in lizards and
snakes; at all events it was not armor-plated as in the crocodile.
They walked or ran upon the hind legs; in many of them the fore limbs
are quite unfitted for support of the body and must have been used
solely in fighting or tearing their prey.

    standing to one side. Dr. Wortman is one of the most notable and
  successful collectors of fossil vertebrates and was in charge of
  the Museum's field work in this department from 1891-1898.]

The huge size of some of these Mesozoic beasts of prey finds no
parallel among their modern analogues. It is only among marine animals
that we find predaceous types of such gigantic size. But among the
carnivorous dinosaurs we fail to find any indications of aquatic or
even amphibious habits. They might indeed wade in the water, but they
could hardly be at home in it, for they were clearly not good
swimmers. We must suppose that they were dry land animals or at most
swamp dwellers.

Dinosaur Footprints. The ancestors of the Theropoda appear first in
the Triassic period, already of large size, but less completely
bipedal than their successors. Incomplete skeletons have been found in
the Triassic formations of Germany but in this country they are
chiefly known from the famous fossil footprints (or "bird-tracks" as
they were at first thought to be), found in the flagstone quarries at
Turner's Falls on the Connecticut River, in the vicinity of Boonton,
New Jersey, and elsewhere. These tracks are the footprints of numerous
kinds of dinosaurs, large and small, mostly of the carnivorous group,
which lived in that region in the earlier part of the Age of Reptiles,
and much has been learned from them as to the habits of the animals
that made them. The tracks ascribed to carnivorous dinosaurs run in
series with narrow tread, short or long steps, here and there a light
impression of tail or forefoot and occasionally the mark of the shank
and pelvis when the animal settled back and squatted down to rest a
moment. The modern crocodiles when they lift the body off the ground,
waddle forward with the short limbs wide apart, and even the lizards
which run on their hind legs have a rather wide tread. But these
dinosaurs ran like birds, setting one foot nearly in front of the
other, so that the prints of right and left feet are nearly in a
straight line. This was on account of their greater length of limb,
which made it easy for them to swing the foot directly underneath the
body at each step like mammals and birds, and thus maintain an even
balance, instead of wabbling from side to side as short legged animals
are compelled to do.

Of the animals that made these innumerable tracks the actual remains
found thus far in this country are exceedingly scanty. Two or three
incomplete skeletons of small kinds are in the Yale Museum, of which
Anchisaurus is the best known.

Megalosaurus. Fragmentary remains of this huge carnivorous dinosaur
were found in England nearly a century ago, and the descriptions by
Dean Buckland and Sir Richard Owen and the restorations due to the
imaginative chisel of Waterhouse Hawkins, have made it familiar to
most English readers. Unfortunately it was, and still remains, very
imperfectly known. It was very closely related to the American
Allosaurus and unquestionably similar in appearance and habits.


ALLOSAURUS.

The following extract is from the American Museum Journal for January
1908.

"Although smaller than its huge contemporary Brontosaurus, this animal
is of gigantic proportions being 34 feet 2 inches in length, and 8
feet 3 inches high."

  ERICAN MUSEUM. After Osborn]

History of the Allosaurus Skeleton. "This rare and finely preserved
skeleton was collected by Mr. F.F. Hubbell in October 1879, in the
Como Bluffs near Medicine Bow, Wyoming, the richest locality in
America for dinosaur skeletons, and is a part of the great collection
of fossil reptiles, amphibians and fishes gathered together by the
late Professor E.D. Cope, and presented to the American Museum in 1899
by President Jesup.

"Shortly after the Centennial Exposition (1876) it had been planned
that Professor Cope's collection of fossils should form part of a
great public museum in Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, the city
undertaking the cost of preparing and exhibiting the specimens, an
arrangement similar to that existing between the American Museum and
the City of New York.

"The plan, however, fell through, and the greater part of this
magnificent collection remained in storage in the basement of Memorial
Hall in Fairmount Park, for the next twenty years. From time to time
Professor Cope removed parts of the collection to his private museum
in Pine Street, for purposes of study and scientific description. He
seems, however, to have had no idea of the perfection and value of
this specimen. In 1899 when the collection was purchased from his
executors by Mr. Jesup, the writer went to Philadelphia under the
instructions of Professor Osborn, Curator of Fossil Vertebrates, to
superintend the packing and removal to the American Museum. At that
time the collection made by Hubbell was still in Memorial Hall, and
the boxes were piled up just as they came in from the West, never
having been unpacked. Professor Cope's assistant, Mr. Geismar,
informed the writer that Hubbell's collection was mostly fragmentary
and not of any great value. Mr. Hubbell's letters from the field
unfortunately were not preserved, but it is likely that they did not
make clear what a splendid find he had made, and as some of his
earlier collections had been fragmentary and of no great interest, the
rest were supposed to be of the same kind.

"When the Cope Collection was unpacked at the American Museum, this
lot of boxes, not thought likely to be of much interest, was left
until the last, and not taken in hand until 1902 or 1903. But when
this specimen was laid out, it appeared that a treasure had come to
light. Although collected by the crude methods of early days, it
consisted of the greater part of the skeleton of a single individual,
with the bones in wonderfully fine preservation, considering that they
had been buried for say eight million years. They were dense black,
hard and uncrushed, even better preserved and somewhat more complete
than the two fine skeletons of Allosaurus from Bone-Cabin Quarry, the
greatest treasures that this famous quarry had supplied. The great
carnivorous dinosaurs are much rarer than the herbivorous kinds, and
these three skeletons are the most complete that have ever been found.
In all the years of energetic exploration that the late Professor
Marsh devoted to searching for dinosaurs in the Jurassic and
Cretaceous formations of the West, he did not obtain any skeletons of
carnivorous kinds anywhere near as complete as these, and their
anatomy was in many respects unknown or conjectural. By comparison of
the three Allosaurus skeletons with one another and with other
specimens of carnivorous dinosaurs of smaller size in this and other
museums, particularly in the National Museum and the Kansas University
Museum, we have been able to reconstruct the missing parts of the Cope
specimen with very little possibility of serious error."

Evidence for Combining and Posing this Mount. "An incomplete
specimen of Brontosaurus, found by Doctor Wortman and Professor W.C.
Knight of the American Museum Expedition of 1897, had furnished
interesting data as to the food and habits of Allosaurus, which were
confirmed by several other fragmentary specimens obtained later in the
Bone-Cabin Quarry. In this Brontosaurus skeleton several of the bones,
especially the spines of the tail vertebrae, when found in the rock,
looked as if they had been scored and bitten off, as though by some
carnivorous animal which had either attacked the Brontosaurus when
alive, or had feasted upon the carcass. When the Allosaurus jaw was
compared with these score marks, it was found to fit them exactly, the
spacing of the scratches being the same as the spacing of the teeth.
Moreover, on taking out the Brontosaurus vertebrae from the quarry, a
number of broken off teeth of Allosaurus were found lying beside them.
As no other remains of Allosaurus or any other animal were
intermingled with the Brontosaurus skeleton, the most obvious
explanation was that these teeth were broken off by an Allosaurus
while devouring the Brontosaurus carcass. Many of the bones of other
herbivorous dinosaurs found in the Bone-Cabin Quarry were similarly
scored and bitten off, and the teeth of Allosaurus were also found
close to them.

"With these data at hand the original idea was conceived of combining
these two skeletons, both from the same formation and found within a
few miles of each other, to represent what must actually have happened
to them in the remote Jurassic period, and mount the Allosaurus
skeleton standing over the remains of a Brontosaurus in the attitude
of feeding upon its carcass. Some modifications were made in the
position to suit the exigencies of an open mount, and to accommodate
the pose to the particular action; the head of the animal was lifted a
little, one hind foot planted upon the carcass, while the other,
resting upon the ground bears most of the weight. The fore feet, used
in these animals only for fighting or for tearing their prey, not for
support, are given characteristic attitudes, and the whole pose
represents the Allosaurus devouring the carcass and raising head and
fore foot in a threatening manner as though to drive away intruders.
The balance of the various parts was carefully studied and adjusted
under direction of the curator. The preparation and mounting of the
specimen were done by Mr. Adam Hermann, head preparator, and his
assistants, especially Messrs. Falkenbach and Lang.

    After Osborn]

"As now exhibited in the Dinosaur Hall, this group gives to the
imaginative observer a most vivid picture of a characteristic scene in
that bygone age, millions of years ago, when reptiles were the lords
of creation, and 'Nature, red in tooth and claw' had lost none of her
primitive savagery, and the era of brute force and ferocity showed
little sign of the gradual amelioration which was to come to pass in
future ages through the predominance of superior intelligence."

Appearance and Habits of Allosaurus. A study of the mechanism of the
Allosaurus skeleton shows us in the first place that the animal is
balanced on the hind limbs, the long heavy tail making an adequate
counterpoise for the short compact body and head. The hind limbs are
nine feet in length when extended, about equal to the length of the
body and neck, and the bones are massively proportioned. When the
thigh bone is set in its normal position, as indicated by the position
of the scars and processes for attachment of the principal muscles
(see under Brontosaurus for the method used to determine this), the
knee bends forward as in mammals and birds, not outward as in most
modern reptiles. The articulations of the foot bones show that the
animal rested upon the ends of the metapodials, as birds and many
mammals do, not upon the sole of the foot like crocodiles or lizards.
The flat vertebral joints show that the short compact body was not as
flexible as the longer body of crocodiles or lizards, in which the
articulations are of the ball and socket type showing that in them
this region was very flexible. The tail also shows a limited
flexibility. It could not be curled or thrown over the back, but
projected out behind the animal, swinging from side to side or up and
down as much as was needed for balance. The curvature of the ribs
shows that the body was narrow and deep, unlike the broad flattened
body of the crocodile or the less flattened but still broad body of
the lizard. The loose hung jaw, articulated far back, shows by the set
of its muscles that it was capable of an enormous gape; while in the
skull there is evidence of a limited movement of the upper jaw on the
cranial portion, intended probably to assist in the swallowing of
large objects, like the double jointed jaw of a snake.

As to the nature of the skin we have no exact knowledge. We may be
sure that it had no bony armor like the crocodile, for remains of any
such armor could not fail to be preserved with the skeletons, as it
always is in fossil crocodiles or turtles. Perhaps it was scaly like
the skin of lizards and snakes, for the horny scales of the body are
not preserved in fossil skeletons of these reptiles. But if so we
might expect from the analogy of the lizard that the scales of the
head would be ossified and preserved in the fossil; and there is
nothing of this kind in the Carnivorous Dinosaurs. We can exclude
feathers from consideration, for these dinosaurs have no affinities to
birds, and there is no evidence for feathers in any dinosaur. Probably
the best evidence is that of the Trachodon or duck-billed dinosaur
although this animal was but distantly related to the Allosaurus. In
Trachodon (see p. 94), we know that the skin bore neither feathers nor
overlapping scales but had a curiously patterned mosaic of tiny
polygonal plates and was thin and quite flexible. Some such type of
skin as this, in default of better evidence, we may ascribe to the
Allosaurus.

  al Montana, where the Tyrannosaurus skeleton was found.]

As to its probable habits, it is safe to infer (see p. 33), that it
was predaceous, active and powerful, and adapted to terrestrial life.
Its methods of attack and combat must have been more like those of
modern reptiles than the more intelligent methods of the mammalian
carnivore. The brain cast of Allosaurus indicates a brain of similar
type and somewhat inferior grade to that of the modern crocodile or
lizard, and far below the bird or mammal in intelligence. The keen
sense of smell of the mammal, the keen vision of the bird, the highly
developed reasoning power of both, were absent in the dinosaur as in
the lizard or crocodile. We may imagine the Allosaurus lying in wait,
watching his prey until its near approach stimulates him into a
semi-instinctive activity; then a sudden swift rush, a fierce snap of
the huge jaws and a savage attack with teeth and claws until the
victim is torn in pieces or swallowed whole. But the stealthy,
persistent tracking of the cat or weasel tribe, the intelligent
generalship of the wolf pack, the well planned attack at the most
vulnerable point in the prey, characteristic of all the predaceous
mammals, would be quite impossible to the dinosaur. By watching the
habits of modern reptiles we may gain a much better idea of his
capacities and limitations than if we judge only from the efficiency
of his teeth and claws, and forget the inferior intelligence that
animated these terrible weapons.


TYRANNOSAURUS.

The "Tyrant Saurian" as Professor Osborn has named him, was the climax
of evolution of the giant flesh-eating dinosaurs. It reached a length
of forty-seven feet, and in bulk must have equalled the mammoth or the
mastodon or the largest living elephants. The massive hind limbs,
supporting the whole weight of the body, exceeded the limbs of the
great proboscideans in bulk, and in a standing position the animal was
eighteen to twenty feet high, as against twelve for the largest
African elephants or the southern mammoth. The head (see frontispiece)
is 4 feet 3 inches long, 3 ft. 4 inches deep, and 2 ft. 9 inches wide;
the long deep powerful jaws set with teeth from 3 to 6 inches long and
an inch wide. To this powerful armament was added the great sharp
claws of the hind feet, and probably the fore feet, curved like those
of eagles, but six or eight inches in length.

During ten years explorations in the Western Cretaceous formations,
Mr. Brown has secured for the Museum three skeletons of this
magnificent dinosaur, incomplete, but finely preserved. The first,
found in 1900, included the jaws, a large part of backbone and ribs,
and some limb bones. The second included most of skull and jaws,
backbone, ribs and pelvis and the hind limbs and feet, but not tail.
The third consisted of a perfect skull and jaws, the backbone, ribs,
pelvis and nearly all of the tail, but no limbs. From these three
specimens it has been possible to reconstruct the entire skeleton. The
exact construction of the fore feet is the only doubtful part. The
fore-limb is very small relatively to the huge size of the animal, but
probably was constructed much as in the Allosaurus with two or three
large curved claws, the inner claw opposing the others.

  eton was taken. American Museum camp in foreground.]

The missing parts of the two best skeletons have been restored, and
with the help of two small models of the skeleton, a group has been
made ready for mounting as the central piece of the proposed
Cretaceous Dinosaur Hall. One of the skeletons is temporarily placed
in the centre of the Quaternary Hall, space for it in the present
Dinosaur Hall being lacking. Following is Professor Osborn's
description of the preparation of this group:

"The mounting of these two skeletons presents mechanical problems of
very great difficulty. The size and weight of the various parts are
enormous. The height of the head in the standing position reaches from
18 to 20 feet above the ground; the knee joint alone reaches 6 feet
above the ground. All the bones are massive; the pelvis, femur and
skull are extremely heavy. Experience with Brontosaurus and with
other large dinosaurs proves that it is impossible to design a
metallic frame in the right pose in advance of assembling the parts.
Even a scale restoration model of the animal as a whole does not
obviate the difficulty.

"Accordingly in preparing to mount Tyrannosaurus for exhibition a
new method has been adopted, namely, to prepare a scale model of
every bone in the skeleton and mount this small skeleton with
flexible joints and parts so that all studies and experiments as to
pose can be made with the models.

"This difficult and delicate undertaking was entrusted to Mr. Erwin
Christman of the artistic staff of the Department of Vertebrate
Palaeontology of the Museum, who has prepared two very exact models to
a one-sixth scale, representing our two skeletons of Tyrannosaurus
rex, which fortunately are of exactly the same size. A series of
three experiments by Mr. Christman on the pose of Tyrannosaurus,
under the direction of the author and Curator Matthew, were not
satisfactory. The advice of Mr. Raymond L. Ditmars, Curator of
Reptiles in the New York Zoological Park, was sought and we thus
obtained the fourth pose, which is shown in the photographs published
herewith.

  taceous Dinosaur Hall.]

"The fourth pose or study, for the proposed full sized mount, is that
of two reptiles of the same size attracted to the same prey. One
reptile is crouching over its prey (which is represented by a portion
of a skeleton). The object of this depressed pose is to bring the
perfectly preserved skull and pelvis very near the ground within easy
reach of the visiting observer. The second reptile is advancing, and
attains very nearly the full height of the animal. The general effect
of this group is the best that can be had and is very realistic,
particularly the crouching figure. A fifth study will embody some
further changes. The upright figure is not well balanced and will be
more effective with the feet closer together, the legs straighter and
the body more erect. These reptiles have a series of strong abdominal
ribs not shown in the models. The fourth position places the pelvis in
an almost impossible position as will be noted from the ischium and
pubis.

"The lateral view of this fourth pose represents the animals just
prior to the convulsive single spring and tooth grip which
distinguishes the combat of reptiles from that of all mammals,
according to Mr. Ditmars.

"The rear view of the standing skeleton displays the peculiarly avian
structure of the iliac junction with the sacral plate, characteristic
of these very highly specialized dinosaurs, also the marked reduction
of the upper end of the median metatarsal bone, which formerly was
believed to be peculiar to Ornithomimus."

This model of the group is on exhibition with the mounted skeleton.

As compared with its predecessor Allosaurus, the Tyrannosaurus is
much more massively proportioned throughout. The skull is more solid,
the jaws much deeper and more powerful, the fore limb much smaller,
the tail shorter, the hind limb straighter and the foot bones more
compacted so that the animal was more strictly "digitigrade,"
approaching the ostriches more closely in this particular.

  WITH HUMAN SKELETON.]

This animal probably reached the maximum of size and of development of
teeth and claws of which its type of animal mechanism was capable. Its
bulk precluded quickness and agility. It must have been designed to
attack and prey upon the ponderous and slow moving Horned and Armored
Dinosaurs with which its remains are found, and whose massive cuirass
and weapons of defense are well matched with its teeth and claws. The
momentum of its huge body involved a seemingly slow and lumbering
action, an inertia of its movements, difficult to start and difficult
to shift or to stop. Such movements are widely different from the
agile swiftness which we naturally associate with a beast of prey. But
an animal which exceeds an average elephant in bulk, no matter what
its habits, is compelled by the laws of mechanics to the ponderous
movements appropriate to its gigantic size. These movements, directed
and controlled by a reptilian brain, must needs be largely automatic
and instinctive. We cannot doubt indeed that the Carnivorous Dinosaurs
developed, along with their elaborately perfected mechanism for
attack, an equally elaborate series of instincts guiding their action
to effective purpose; and a complex series of automatic responses to
the stimulus afforded by the sight and action of their prey might
very well mimic intelligent pursuit and attack, always with certain
limits set by the inflexible character of such automatic adjustments.
But no animal as large as Tyrannosaurus could leap or spring upon
another, and its slow stride quickening into a swift resistless rush,
might well end in unavoidable impalement upon the great horns of
Triceratops, futile weapons against a small and active enemy, but
designed no doubt to meet just such attacks as these. A true picture
of these combats of titans of the ancient world we cannot draw;
perhaps we will never be able to reconstruct it. But the above
considerations may serve to show how widely it would differ from the
pictures based upon any modern analogies.

One may well inquire why it is that no such gigantic carnivora have
evolved among the mammalian land animals. The largest predaceous
quadrupeds living today are the lion and tiger. The bears although
some of them are much larger, are not generally carnivorous, except
for the polar bear, which is partly aquatic, preying chiefly upon
seals and fish. There are indeed carnivorous whales of gigantic size,
but no very large land carnivore. There were, it is true, during the
Tertiary and Pleistocene, lions and other carnivores considerably
larger than the living species. But none of them attained the size of
their largest herbivorous contemporaries, or even approached it. Among
the dinosaurs on the other hand we find that--setting aside
Brontosaurus and its allies as aquatic--the predaceous kinds equalled
or exceeded the largest of the herbivorous sorts. The difference is
striking, and it does not seem likely that it is merely accidental.

The explanation lies probably in the fact that the large herbivorous
mammals are much more intelligent and active, and would be able to use
their weapons of defense so as to defy the attacks of relatively slow
moving giant beasts of prey, as they do also the more active but less
powerful assaults of smaller ones. The elephant or the rhinoceros is
in fact practically immune from the attacks of carnivora, and would
still be so were the carnivora to increase in size. The large modern
carnivora prey upon herbivores of medium or smaller size, which they
are active enough to surprise or run down. Carnivora of much larger
size would be too slow and heavy in movements to catch small prey,
while the larger herbivores by intelligent use of their defensive
weapons could still fend them off successfully. In consequence giant
carnivores would find no field for action in the Cenozoic world, and
hence they have not been evolved.

But the giant herbivorous dinosaurs, well armed or well defended
though they were, had not the intelligence to use those weapons
effectively under all circumstances. Thus they might be successfully
attacked, at least sometimes, by the powerful although slow moving
Megalosaurians.

The suggestion has also been made that these giant carnivores were
carrion-eaters rather than truly predaceous. The hypothesis can hardly
be effectively supported nor attacked. It is presented as a possible
alternate.

Albertosaurus. Closely allied to the Tyrannosaurus but smaller,
about equal in size to Allosaurus, was the Albertosaurus of the
Edmonton formation in Canada. It is somewhat older than the Tyrannosaur
although still of the late Cretacic period, and may have been ancestral
to it. A fine series of limbs and feet as also skull, tail, etc., are
in the Museum's collections. At or about this time carnivorous
dinosaurs of slightly smaller size are known to have inhabited New
Jersey; a fragmentary skeleton of one secured by Professor Cope in 1869
was described as Laelaps (=Dryptosaurus).

Ornitholestes. In contrast with the Allosaurus and Tyrannosaurus
this skeleton represents the smaller and more agile carnivorous
dinosaurs which preyed upon the lesser herbivorous reptiles of the
period. These little dinosaurs were probably common during all the Age
of Reptiles, much as the smaller quadrupeds are today, but skulls or
skeletons are rarely found in the formations known to us. The
Anchisaurus, Podokesaurus and other genera of the Triassic Period
have left innumerable tracks upon the sandy shales of the Newark
formation, but only two or three skeletons are known. A cast of one
of them is exhibited here. The original is preserved in the Yale
Museum. In the succeeding Jurassic Period we have the Compsognathus,
smallest of known dinosaurs, and this Ornitholestes some six feet
long. A cast of the Compsognathus skeleton is shown, the original
found in the lithographic limestone of Solenhofen is preserved in the
Munich Museum. The Ornitholestes is from the Bone-Cabin Quarry in
Wyoming. The forefoot with its long slender digits is supposed to have
been adapted for grasping an active and elusive prey, and the name
(Ornitho-lestes = bird-robber) indicates that that prey may
sometimes have been the primitive birds which were its contemporaries.
In the Cretacic Period, there were also small and medium sized
carnivorous dinosaurs, contemporary with the gigantic kinds; a
complete skeleton of Ornithomimus at the entrance to the Dinosaur
Hall finely illustrates this group. In appearance most of these small
dinosaurs must have suggested long-legged bipedal lizards, running and
walking on their hind limbs, with the long tail stretched out behind
to balance the body. From what we know of their tracks it seems that
they walked or ran with a narrow treadway, the footsteps almost in the
middle line of progress. They did not hop like perching birds, nor did
they waddle like most living reptiles. Occasionally the tail or fore
feet touched the ground as they walked; and when they sat down, they
rested on the end of the pubic bones and on the tail. So much we can
infer from the footprint impressions. The general appearance is shown
in the restorations of Ornitholestes, Compsognathus and
Anchisaurus by Charles Knight.

  orous dinosaur of the Jurassic period. American Museum No.
  619.]

  ight under direction of Professor Osborn. After Osborn]

Ornithomimus. The skeleton of this animal from the Cretacic of
Alberta was found by the Museum expedition of 1914. It is
exceptionally complete, and has been mounted as a panel, in position
as it lay in the rock, and with considerable parts of the original
sandstone matrix still adherent. The long slender limbs, long neck,
small head and toothless jaws are all singularly bird-like, and afford
a striking contrast to the Tyrannosaurus. At the time of writing, its
adaptation and relationships have not yet been thoroughly
investigated.

  AMERICAN MUSEUM.]

FOOTNOTES:

 This is still doubtful in Tyrannosaurus. A number of
very curious plates were found with one specimen in a quarry. B.
Brown, 1913.]

 Quite recently a series of more or less complete
skeletons have been secured from the upper Triassic (Keuper) near
Halberstadt in Germany. They are not true Megalosaurians, but
primitive types (Pachypodosauria) ancestral to both these and the
Sauropoda. Probably many of the Connecticut footprints were made by
animals of this primitive group. Anchisaurus certainly belongs to
it.]

 It is evidently "the dinosaur" of Sir Conan Doyle's "Lost
World" but the vivid description which the great English novelist
gives of its appearance and habits, based probably upon the Hawkins
restoration, is not at all in accord with inferences from what is now
known of these animals. See p. 44.]

 Allosaurus, a carnivorous Dinosaur, and its Prey. By W.D.
Matthew. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist. Jour. Vol. viii, pp. 3-5, pl. 1.]



 Tyrannosaurus, Restoration and Model of the Skeleton. By
Henry Fairfield Osborn. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 1913, vol. xxxii,
art. iv, pp. 91-92.]

: Since these lines were written the Museum has secured
finely preserved skeletons of two or more kinds of Carnivorous
Dinosaurs from the Belly River formation in Canada.]




CHAPTER V.

THE AMPHIBIOUS DINOSAURS, BRONTOSAURUS, DIPLODOCUS, ETC.

SUB-ORDER OPISTHOCOELIA (CETIOSAURIA OR SAUROPODA).


These were the Giant Reptiles par-excellence, for all of them were of
enormous size, and some were by far the largest of all four-footed
animals, exceeded in bulk only by the modern whales. In contrast to
the carnivorous dinosaurs these are quadrupedal, with very small head,
blunt teeth, long giraffe-like neck, elephantine body and limbs, long
massive tail prolonged at the tip into a whip-lash as in the lizards.
Like the elephant they have five short toes on each foot, probably
buried in life in a large soft pad, but the inner digits bear large
claws, blunt like those of turtles, one in the fore foot, three in the
hind foot.

To this group belong the Brontosaurus and Diplodocus, the
Camarasaurus, Morosaurus and other less known kinds. All of them lived
during the late Jurassic and Comanchic ("Lower Cretaceous") and belong
to the older of the two principal Dinosaur faunas. They were
contemporaries of the Allosaurus and Megalosaurus, the Stegosaurus and
Iguanodon, but unlike the Carnivorous and Beaked Dinosaurs they
became wholly extinct before the Upper or true Cretacic, and left no
relatives to take part in the final epoch of expansion and prosperity
of the dinosaurian race at the close of the Reptilian era.

  plodocus (below) in the American Museum. The parts preserved
  in these specimens are shaded. Scale, 10 feet=1 inch.]


BRONTOSAURUS.

The following description of the Brontosaurus skeleton in the American
Museum was first published in the American Museum Journal of April,
1905:

"The Brontosaurus skeleton, the principal feature of the hall, is
sixty-six feet eight inches long. (The weight of the animal when alive
is estimated by W.K. Gregory at 38 tons). About one-third of the
skeleton including the skull is restored in plaster modelled or cast
from other incomplete skeletons. The remaining two-thirds belong to
one individual, except for a part of the tail, one shoulder-blade and
one hind limb, supplied from another skeleton of the same species.

"The skeleton was discovered by Mr. Walter Granger of the Museum
expedition of 1898, about nine miles north of Medicine Bow, Wyoming.
It took the whole of the succeeding summer to extract it from the
rock, pack it, and ship it to the Museum. Nearly two years were
consumed in removing the matrix, piecing together and cementing the
brittle and shattered petrified bone, strengthening it so that it
would bear handling, and restoring the missing parts of the bones in
tinted plaster. The articulation and mounting of the skeleton and
modelling of the missing bones took an even longer time, so that it
was not until February, 1905, that the Brontosaurus was at last ready
for exhibition.

  e upper photograph shows the anterior ribs of one side still
  lying in position. The backbone is being prepared for removal, the
  sections each containing three vertebrae, partly cased in plaster
  and burlap (see chapter XI.) The lower photograph shows a later
  stage of progress, the blocks being undercut and nearly ready to
  turn over and incase the under side. Strips of wood have been
  pasted into each section to strengthen it.]

"It will appear, therefore, that the collection, preparation and
mounting of this gigantic fossil has been a task of extraordinary
difficulty. No museum has ever before attempted to mount so large a
fossil skeleton, and the great weight and fragile character of the
bones made it necessary to devise especial methods to give each bone a
rigid and complete support as otherwise it would soon break in pieces
from its own weight. The proper articulating of the bones and posing
of the limbs were equally difficult problems, for the Amphibious
Dinosaurs, to which this animal belongs, disappeared from the earth
long before the dawn of the Age of Mammals, and their nearest
relatives, the living lizards, crocodiles, etc., are so remote from
them in either proportions or habits that they are unsatisfactory
guides in determining how the bones were articulated and are of but
little use in posing the limbs and other parts of the body in
positions that they must have taken during life. Nor among the higher
animals of modern times is there one which has any analogy in
appearance or habits of life to those which we have been obliged by
the study of the skeleton to ascribe to the Brontosaurus.

"As far as the backbone and ribs were concerned, the articulating
surfaces of the bones were a sufficient guide to enable us to pose
this part of the skeleton properly. The limb joints, however, are so
imperfect that we could not in this way make sure of having the bones
in a correct position. The following method, therefore, was adopted.

"A dissection and thorough study was made by the writer, with the
assistance of Mr. Granger, of the limbs of alligators and other
reptiles, and the position, size and action of the principal muscles
were carefully worked out. Then the corresponding bones of the
Brontosaurus were studied, and the position and size of the
corresponding muscles were worked out, so far as they could be
recognized from the scars and processes preserved on the bone. The
Brontosaurus limbs were then provisionally articulated and posed, and
the position and size of each muscle were represented by a broad strip
of paper extending from its origin to its insertion. The action and
play of the muscles on the limb of the Brontosaurus could then be
studied, and the bones adjusted until a proper and mechanically
correct pose was reached. The limbs were then permanently mounted in
these poses, and the skeleton as it stands is believed to represent,
as nearly as study of the fossil enables us to know, a characteristic
position that the animal actually assumed during life....

"In proportions and appearance the Brontosaurus was quite unlike any
living animal. It had a long thick tail like the lizards and
crocodiles, a long, flexible neck like an ostrich, a thick short,
slab-sided body and straight, massive, post-like limbs suggesting the
elephant, and a remarkably small head for the size of the beast. The
ribs, limb-bones and tail-bones are exceptionally solid and heavy; the
vertebrae of the back and neck, and the skull, on the contrary are
constructed so as to combine the minimum of weight with the large
surface necessary for the attachment of the huge muscles, the largest
possible articulating surfaces, and the necessary strength at all
points of strain. For this purpose they are constructed with an
elaborate system of braces and buttresses of thin bony plates
connecting the broad articulating surfaces and muscular attachments,
all the bone between these thin plates being hollowed into a
complicated system of air-cavities. This remarkable structure can be
best seen in the unmounted skeleton of Camarasaurus, another
Amphibious Dinosaur." (The scientific name Camarasaurus=chambered
lizard, has reference to this peculiarity of construction.)

"The teeth of the Brontosaurus indicate that it was an herbivorous
animal, feeding on soft vegetable food. Three opinions as to the
habitat of Amphibious Dinosaurs have been held by scientific
authorities. The first, advocated by Professor Owen, who described the
first specimens found sixty years ago (1841-60) and supported
especially by Professor Cope, has been most generally adopted. This
regards the animals as spending their lives entirely in shallow water,
partly immersed, wading about on the bottom, or perhaps occasionally
swimming, but unable to emerge entirely upon dry land. More
recently, Professor Osborn has advocated the view that they resorted
occasionally to the land for egg laying or other purposes, and still
more recently the view has been taken by Mr. Riggs and the late
Professor Hatcher that they were chiefly terrestrial animals. The
writer inclines to the view of Owen and Cope, whose unequalled
knowledge of comparative anatomy renders their opinion on this
doubtful question especially authoritative.

  HT, UNDER DIRECTION OF PROFESSOR OSBORN. After Osborn]

"The contrast between the massive structure of the limb-bones, ribs
and tail, and the light construction of the backbone, neck and skull,
suggests that the animal was amphibious, living chiefly in shallow
water, where it could wade about on the bottom, feeding upon the
abundant vegetation of the coastal swamps and marshes, and pretty much
out of reach of the powerful and active Carnivorous Dinosaurs which
were its principal enemies. The water would buoy up the massive body
and prevent its weight from pressing too heavily on the imperfect
joints of the limb and foot bones, which were covered during life with
thick cartilage, like the joints of whales, sea-lizards and other
aquatic animals. If the full weight of the animal came on these
imperfect joints the cartilage would yield and the ends of the bones
would grind against each other, thus preventing the limb from moving
without tearing the joint to pieces. The massive, solid limb and foot
bones weighted the limbs while immersed in water, and served the same
purpose as the lead in a diver's shoes, enabling the Brontosaurus to
walk about firmly and securely under water. On the other hand, the
joints of the neck and back are exceptionally broad, well fitting and
covered with a much thinner surface of cartilage. The pressure was
thus much better distributed over the joint, and the full weight of
the part of the animal above water (reduced as it was by the cellular
construction of the bones) might be borne on these joints without the
cartilage giving way.

"Looking at the mounted skeleton we may see that if a line be drawn
from the hip joint to the shoulder-blade, all the bones below this are
massive, all above (including neck and head) are lightly constructed.
This line may be taken to indicate the average water-line, so to
speak, of this Leviathan of the Shallows. The long neck would enable
the animal, however, to wade to a considerable depth, and it might
forage for food either in the branches or the tops of trees, or more
probably, among the soft succulent water-plants of the bottom. The row
of short spoon-shaped stubby teeth around the front of the mouth would
serve to bite or pull off soft leaves and water-plants, but the animal
evidently could not masticate its food, and must have swallowed it
without chewing as do modern reptiles and birds.

"The brain-case occupies only a small part of the back of the skull,
so that the brain must have been small even for a reptile, and its
organization (as inferred from the form of the brain-case) indicates a
very low grade of intelligence. Much larger than the brain proper was
the spinal cord, especially in the region of the sacrum, controlling
most of the reflex and involuntary actions of the huge organism. Hence
we can best regard the Brontosaurus as a great, slow-moving animal
automaton, a vast storehouse of organized matter directed chiefly or
solely by instinct, and to a very limited degree, if at all, by
conscious intelligence. Its huge size and its imperfect organization,
compared with the great quadrupeds of today, rendered its movements
slow and clumsy; its small and low brain shows that it must have been
automatic, instinctive and unintelligent."

Composition of the Brontosaurus Skeleton. "The principal specimen,
No. 460, is from the Nine Mile Crossing of the Little Medicine Bow
River, Wyoming. It consists of the 5th, 6th, and 8th to 13th cervical
vertebrae, 1st to 9th dorsal and 3rd to 19th caudal vertebrae, all the
ribs, both coracoids, parts of sacrum and ilia, both ischia and pubes,
left femur and astragalus, and part of left fibula. The backbone and
most of the neck of this specimen were found articulated together in
the quarry, the ribs of one side in position, the remainder of the
bones scattered around them, and some of the tail bones weathered out
on the surface.

"From No. 222, found at Como Bluffs, Wyo., were supplied the right
scapula, 10th dorsal vertebra, and right femur and tibia.

"No. 339, from Bone-Cabin Quarry, Wyoming, supplied the 20th to 40th
caudal vertebrae, No. 592, from the same locality the metatarsals of
the right hind foot; and a few toe bones are supplied from other
specimens.

  ry, north of Medicine Bow, Wyoming.]

"The remainder of the skeleton is modelled in plaster, the scapula,
humerus, radius and ulna from the skeleton in the Yale Museum, the
rest principally from specimens in our own collections. The modelling
of the skull is based partly upon specimens in the Yale Museum, but
principally upon the complete skull of Morosaurus shown in another
case.

"Mounted by A. Hermann, completed Feb. 10, 1905."

Diplodocus. The Diplodocus nearly equalled the Brontosaurus in
bulk and exceeded it in length. A skeleton in the Carnegie Museum at
Pittsburgh measures 87 feet in total length; although the mount is
composed from several individuals these proportions are probably not
far from correct. The skull is smaller and differently shaped and the
teeth are of quite different type. In the American Museum of Natural
History, a partial skeleton is exhibited in the wall case to the left
of the entrance of the Dinosaur Hall, and in an A-case near by are
skulls of Diplodocus and Morosaurus and a model of the skull of
Brontosaurus. The Diplodocus skull is widely different from the
other two in size and proportions and in the characters of teeth.

When the first remains of these amphibious Dinosaurs were found in the
Oxford Clays of England, they were considered by Richard Owen to be
related to the Crocodiles, and named Opisthocoelia. Subsequently the
finding of complete skeletons in this country led Cope and Marsh to
place them with the true Dinosaurs and the latter named them
Sauropoda. Remains of these animals have also been found in India,
in German East Africa, in Madagascar, and in South America, so that
they were evidently widely distributed. In the Northern world they
survived until the Comanchic or Lower Cretaceous Period, but in the
southern continents they may have lived on into the Upper Cretaceous
or true Cretacic. Some of the remains recently found in German East
Africa indicate an animal exceeding either Brontosaurus or
Diplodocus in bulk.

  struction of Brachiosaurus, from specimens in the Field
  Museum in Chicago, and the Natural History Museum in Berlin.]

At the date of writing this handbook only preliminary accounts have
been given of the marvellous finds made near Tendaguru by the
expedition from Berlin. From these it appears that in length of neck
and fore limb this East African Dinosaur greatly exceeded either
Brontosaurus or Diplodocus. The hinder parts of the skeleton
however, were relatively small. The proportions and measurements given
tally closely with the American Brachiosaurus, a gigantic sauropod
whose incomplete remains are preserved in the Field Museum in Chicago
and to this genus the Berlin authorities now refer their largest and
finest skeleton. If the Berlin specimens are correctly referred to
Brachiosaurus they indicate an animal somewhat exceeding
Diplodocus or Brontosaurus in total bulk but distinguished by much
longer fore limbs and an immensely long neck--a giraffe-like wader
adapted to take refuge in deeper waters, more out of reach of the
fierce carnivores of the land.

FOOTNOTES:

: The mounted Skeleton of Brontosaurus, by W.D. Matthew,
Amer. Mus. Jour. Vol. v, pp. 63-70, figs. 1-5.]

: Professor Williston makes the following criticism of
this theory:

   "I cannot agree with this view--the animals must have laid
   their eggs upon land--for the reason that reptile eggs cannot
   hatch in water. S.W.W."

But with deference to Williston's high authority I may note that there
is no evidence that the Sauropoda were egg-laying reptiles. They, or
some of them, may have been viviparous like the Ichthyosaurus.]

: European palaeontologists, especially Huxley and Seeley
in England, had also recognized their true relationships, and Seeley's
term Cetiosauria has precedence over Sauropoda, although the latter is
in common use.]

: It is of interest to observe that in this group of
Sauropoda, the Brachiosauridæ, the neural spines of the vertebrae are
much simpler and narrower than in the Brontosaurus and Diplodocus. The
attachments were thus less extensive for the muscles of the back,
indicating that these muscles were less powerful. This difference is
correlated by Professor Williston with the longer fore limbs of the
Brachiosaurus, as signifying that the animal was less able, as indeed
he had less need, to rise up upon the hind limbs, in comparison with
Diplodocus or Brontosaurus in which the fore limbs were relatively
short.]




CHAPTER VI.

THE BEAKED DINOSAURS.

ORDER ORTHOPODA (ORNITHISCHIA OR PREDENTATA.)


The peculiar feature of this group of Dinosaurs is the horny beak or
bill. The bony core sutured to the front of the upper and lower jaws
was covered in life by a horny sheath, as in birds or turtles. But
this is not the only feature in which they came nearer to birds than
do the other Dinosaurs. The pelvic or hip bones are much more
bird-like in many respects, especially the backward direction of the
pubic bone, the presence of a prepubis, in the number of vertebrae
coössified into a solid sacrum, in the proportions of the ilium and so
on. Various features in the anatomy of the head, shoulder-blades and
hind limbs are equally suggestive of birds, and it seems probable that
the earliest ancestors of the birds were very closely related to the
ancestors of this group of Dinosaurs. But the ancestral birds became
adapted to flying, the ancestral Predentates to terrestrial life, and
in their later development became as widely diversified in form and
habits as the warm-blooded quadrupeds which succeeded them in the Age
of Mammals.

  saurs. Iguanodon and Camptosaurus of the Jurassic and
  Comanchic; Kritosaurus and Corythosaurus of the Middle
  Cretacic (Belly River); Saurolophus of the late Cretacic
  (Edmonton); Trachodon of the latest Cretacic (Lance). The
  Iguanodon is European, the others North American. All 1/25 natural
  size.]

These Beaked Dinosaurs were, so far as we can tell, all vegetarians.
Unlike the birds, they retained their teeth and in some cases
converted them into a grinding apparatus which served the same purpose
as the grinders of herbivorous quadrupeds. It is interesting to
observe the different way in which this result is attained. In the
mammals the teeth, originally more complex in construction and fewer
in number, are converted into efficient grinders by infolding and
elongation of the crown of each tooth so as to produce on the wearing
surface a complex pattern of enamel ridges with softer dentine or
cement intervening, making a series of crests and hollows continually
renewed during the wear of the tooth. In the reptile the teeth,
originally simple in construction but more numerous and continually
renewed as they wear down and fall out, are banked up in several
close packed rows, the enamel borders and softer dentine giving a
wearing surface of alternating crests and hollows continually renewed,
and reinforced from time to time, by the addition of new rows of teeth
to one side, as the first formed rows wear down to the roots. This is
the best illustrated in the Trachodon (see fig. 27); the other
groups have not so perfect a mechanism.


A. THE IGUANODONTS: IGUANODON, CAMPTOSAURUS.

Sub-Order Ornithopoda or Iguanodontia.

In the early days of geology, about the middle of the nineteenth
century, bones and footprints of huge extinct reptiles were found in
the rocks of the Weald in south-eastern England. They were described
by Mantell and Owen and shown to pertain to an extinct group of
reptiles which Owen called the Dinosauria. So different were these
bones from those of any modern reptiles that even the anatomical
learning of the great English palaeontologist did not enable him to
place them all correctly or reconstruct the true proportions of the
animal to which they belonged. With them were found associated the
bones of the great carnivorous dinosaur Megalosaurus; and the weird
reconstructions of these animals, based by Waterhouse Hawkins upon the
imperfect knowledge and erroneous ideas then prevailing, must be
familiar to many of the older readers of this handbook. Life size
restorations of these and other extinct animals were erected in the
grounds of the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, London, and in Central
Park, New York. Those in London still exist, so far as the writer is
aware, but the stern mandate of a former mayor of New York ordered the
destruction of the Central Park models, not indeed as incorrect
scientifically, but as inconsistent with the doctrines of revealed
religion, and they were accordingly broken up and thrown into the
waters of the Park lake. Small replicas of these early attempts at
restoring dinosaurs may still be seen in some of the older museums in
this country and abroad.

  LATIVE OF THE IGUANODON.]

The real construction of the Iguanodon was gradually built up by later
discoveries, and in 1877 an extraordinary find in a coal mine at
Bernissart in Belgium brought to light no less than seventeen
skeletons more or less complete. These were found in an ancient
fissure filled with rocks of Comanchic age, traversing the
Carboniferous strata in which the coal seam lay, and with them were
skeletons of other extinct reptiles of smaller size. The open fissure
had evidently served as a trap into which these ancient giants had
fallen, and either killed by the fall or unable to escape from the
pit, their remains had been subsequently covered up by sediments and
the pit filled in to remain sealed up until the present day. These
skeletons, unique in their occurrence and manner of discovery, are the
pride of the Brussels Museum of Natural History, and, together with
the earlier discoveries, have made the Iguanodon the most familiar
type of dinosaur to the people of England and Western Europe.

  don. The dental magazine has been removed from the lower
  jaw and is seen to consist of several close-set rows of numerous
  small pencil-like teeth which are pushed up from beneath as they
  wear off at the grinding surface.]

Camptosaurus. The American counterpart of the Iguanodons of Europe
was the Camptosaurus, nearly related and generally similar in
proportions but including mostly smaller species, and lacking some of
the peculiar features of the Old World genus. In the National Museum
at Washington, are mounted two skeletons of Camptosaurus, a large
and a small species, and in the American Museum a skeleton of a small
species. It suggests a large kangaroo in size and proportions, but the
three-toed feet, with hoof-like claws, the reptilian skull, loosely
put together, with lizard-like cheek teeth and turtle beak indicate a
near relative of the great Iguanodon.

Thescelosaurus. The Iguanodont family survived until the close of
the Age of Reptiles, with no great change in proportions or
characters. Its latest member is Thescelosaurus, a contemporary of
Triceratops. Partial skeletons of this animal are shown in the
Dinosaur Hall; a more complete one is in the National Museum.

FOOTNOTES:

: Trachodont teeth never drop out, they are completely
consumed. Only in the Iguanodonts and Ceratopsia are they shed.--B.
Brown.]




CHAPTER VII.

THE BEAKED DINOSAURS (Continued).

B. THE DUCK BILLED DINOSAURS,--TRACHODON, SAUROLOPHUS, ETC.

Sub-Order Ornithopoda; Family Trachodontidæ.


These animals of the Upper Cretaceous are probably descended from the
Iguanodonts of an older period. But the long ages that intervened,
some millions of years, have brought about various changes in the
race, not so much in general proportions as in altering the form and
relations of various bones of skull and skeleton and perfecting their
adaptation to a somewhat different habit of life, so that they must be
regarded as descendants perhaps, but certainly rather distant
relatives, of the older group.

We know more about the Trachodonts than any other dinosaurs. For not
only are the skeletons more frequently found articulated, but parts of
the skin are not uncommonly preserved with them, and in one specimen
at least, so much of the skin is preserved that it may fairly be
called a "dinosaur mummy." This specimen of Trachodon is in the
American Museum, and beside it are two fine mounted skeletons of the
largest size. There is also on exhibition a panel mount of a nearly
related genus, Saurolophus the skeleton lying as it was found in the
rock, and a fine skeleton of a third genus Corythosaurus with the
skin partly preserved on both sides of the crushed and flattened body
stands beside it. In the Tyrannosaurus group when completed will
appear a fourth skeleton of the Trachodon. Several skulls and
incomplete skeletons on exhibition and other skeletons not yet
prepared add to the Museum collection of this group. Trachodon
skeletons may also be found in the Museums of New Haven, Washington,
Frankfurt-on-the-Main, London and Paris, but nowhere a series
comparable to that displayed at the American Museum.


THE TRACHODON GROUP.

The following description of the Trachodon group is by Mr. Barnum
Brown and first appeared in the American Museum Journal for April
1908:

"This group takes us back in imagination to the Cretaceous period,
more than three millions of years ago, when Trachodonts were among the
most numerous of the dinosaurs. Two members of the family are
represented here as feeding in the marshes that characterized the
period, when one is startled by the approach of a carnivorous
dinosaur, Tyrannosaurus, their enemy, and rises on tiptoe to look over
the surrounding plants and determine the direction from which it is
coming. The other Trachodon, unaware of danger, continues peacefully
to crop the foliage. Perhaps the erect member of the group had already
had unpleasant experiences with hostile beasts, for a bone of its left
foot bears three sharp gashes which were made by the teeth of some
carnivorous dinosaur.

  erican Museum. Height of standing skeleton 16 feet, 10 inches.]

"By thus grouping the skeletons in lifelike attitudes, the relation of
the different bones can best be shown, but these of course are only
two of the attitudes commonly taken by the creatures during life.
Mechanical and anatomical considerations, especially the long straight
shafts of the leg bones, indicate that dinosaurs walked with their
limbs straight under the body, rather than in a crawling attitude with
the belly close to the ground, as is common among living reptiles.

"Trachodonts lived near the close of the Age of Reptiles in the Upper
Cretaceous and had a wide geographical distribution, their remains
having been found in New Jersey, Mississippi and Alabama, but more
commonly in Wyoming, Montana, and the Dakotas. A suggestion of the
great antiquity of these specimens is given by the fact that since the
animals died layers of rock aggregating many thousand feet in vertical
thickness have been deposited along the Atlantic coast.

"The bones of the erect specimen are but little crushed and a clear
conception of the proportions of the animal can best be obtained from
this specimen. It will be seen that the Trachodon was shaped somewhat
like a kangaroo, with short fore legs, long hind legs, and a long
tail. The fore limbs are reduced indeed to about one-sixth the size of
the hind limbs and judging from the size and shape of the foot bones
the front legs could not have borne much weight. They were probably
used in supporting the anterior portion of the body when the creature
was feeding, and in aiding it to recover an upright position. The
specimen represented as feeding is posed so that the fore legs carry
very little of the weight of the body. There are four toes on the
front foot but the thumb is greatly reduced and the fifth digit or
little finger, is absent." (Subsequent discoveries have shown that the
arrangement of the digits made by Marsh and followed in this skeleton
is incorrect. It is the first digit that is absent, and the fifth is
reduced.)

"The hind legs are massive and have three well developed toes ending
in broad hoofs. The pelvis is lightly constructed with bones elongated
like those of birds. The long deep compressed tail was particularly
adapted for locomotion in the water. It may also have served to
balance the creature when standing erect on shore. The broad expanded
lip of bone known as the fourth trochanter, on the inner posterior
face of the femur or thigh bone was for the attachment of powerful
tail muscles similar to those which enable the crocodile to move its
tail from side to side with such dexterity. This trochanter is absent
from the thigh bones of land-inhabiting dinosaurs with short tails,
such as Stegosaurus and Triceratops. The tail muscles were
attached to the vertebrae by numerous rod-like tendons which are
preserved in position as fossils on the erect skeleton. Trachodonts
are thought to have been expert swimmers. Unlike other dinosaurs their
remains are frequently found in rocks that were formed under sea
water probably bordering the shores but nevertheless containing
typical sea shells.

"The elaborate dental apparatus is such as to show clearly that
Trachodonts were strictly herbivorous creatures. The mouth was
expanded to form a broad duck-like bill which during life was covered
with a horny sheath, as in birds and turtles. Each jaw is provided
with from 45 to 60 vertical and from 10 to 14 horizontal rows of
teeth, so that there were more than 2000 teeth altogether in both
jaws.

"Among living saurians, or reptiles, the small South American iguana
Amblyrhynchus may be compared in some respects with the Trachodons
notwithstanding the difference in size. These modern saurians live in
great numbers on the shores of the Galapagos Islands off the coast of
Chile. They swim out to sea in shoals and feed exclusively on seaweed
which grows on the bottom at some distance from shore. The animal
swims with perfect ease and quickness by a serpentine movement of its
body and flattened tail, its legs meanwhile being closely pressed to
its side and motionless. This is also the method of propulsion of
crocodiles when swimming.

"The carnivorous or flesh-eating dinosaurs that lived on land, such as
Allosaurus and Tyrannosaurus, were protected from foes by their
sharp biting teeth, while the land-living herbivorous forms were
provided with defensive horns, as in Triceratops, sharp spines as
in Stegosaurus or were completely armored as in Ankylosaurus.
Trachodon was not provided with horns, spines or plated armor, but it
was sufficiently protected from carnivorous land forms by being able
to enter and remain in the water. Its skin was covered with small
raised scales, pentagonal in form on the body and tail, where they
were largest, with smaller reticulations over the joints but never
overlapping as in snakes or fishes. A Trachodon skeleton was recently
found with an impression of the skin surrounding the vertebrae which
is so well preserved that it gives even the contour of the tail as is
shown in the illustration (fig. 32).

"During the existence of the Trachodonts the climate of the northern
part of North America was much warmer than it is at present, the plant
remains indicating a climate for Wyoming and Montana similar to what
now prevails in Southern California. Palm leaves resembling the
palmetto of Florida are frequently found in the same rocks with these
skeletons. Here occur also such, at present, widely separated trees as
the gingko now native of China, and the Sequoia now native of the
Pacific Coast. Fruits and leaves of the fig tree are also common, but
most abundant among the plant remains are the Equisetae or horsetail
rushes, some species of which possibly supplied the Trachodons with
food.

  Trachodon. This restoration, made by Mr. Knight under supervision
  of Professor Osborn, embodies the latest evidence as to the
  structure and characteristic poses of these animals, the character
  of the skin and their probable habits and environment. After
  Osborn]

"Impressions of the more common plants found in the rocks of this
period with sections of the tree trunks showing the woody structure
will be  introduced into the group as the ground on which
the skeletons stand. In the rivers and bayous of that remote period
there also lived many kinds of Unios or fresh-water clams, and other
shells, the casts of which are frequently found with Trachodon bones.
The fossil trunk of a coniferous tree was found in Wyoming, which was
filled with groups of wood-living shells similar to the living Teredo.
These also will be introduced in the ground-work.

"The skeleton mounted in a feeding posture was one of the principal
specimens in the Cope Collection, which, through the generosity of the
late President Jesup, was purchased and given to the American Museum.
It was found near the Moreau River, north of the Black Hills, South
Dakota, in 1882, by Dr. J.L. Wortman and Mr. R.S. Hill, collectors for
Professor Cope. The erect skeleton came from Crooked Creek, central
Montana, and was found by a ranchman, Mr. Oscar Hunter, while riding
through the bad lands with a companion in 1904. The specimen was
partly exposed, with backbone and ribs united in position. The parts
that were weathered out are much lighter in color than the other
bones. Their large size caused some discussion between the ranchmen
and to settle the question, Mr. Hunter dismounted and kicked off all
the tops of the vertebrae and rib-heads above ground, thereby proving
by their brittle nature that they were stone and not buffalo bones as
the other man contended. The proof was certainly conclusive, but it
was extremely exasperating to the subsequent collectors. Another
ranchman, Mr. Alfred Sensiba, heard of the find and knowing that it
was valuable 'traded' Mr. Hunter a six-shooter for his interest in it.
The specimen was purchased from Messrs. Sensiba Brothers and excavated
by the American Museum in 1906."

  DON PRESERVING THE SKIN IMPRESSIONS OVER A LARGE PART OF THE
  BODY. After Osborn]


THE DINOSAUR "MUMMY."

We all believe that the Dinosaurs existed. But to realize it is not
so easy. Even with the help of the mounted skeletons and restorations,
they are somewhat unreal and shadowy beings in the minds of most of
us. But this "dinosaur mummy" sprawling on his back and covered with
shrunken skin--a real specimen, not restored in any part--brings home
the reality of this ancient world even as the mummy of an ancient
Egyptian brings home to us the reality of the world of the Pharaohs.
The description of this unique skeleton by Professor Henry Fairfield
Osborn first appeared in the Museum Journal for January 1911.

"Two years ago (1908) through the Jesup Fund, the Museum came into
possession of a most unique specimen discovered in August 1908, by the
veteran fossil hunter Charles H. Sternberg of Kansas. It is a large
herbivorous dinosaur of the closing period of the Age of Reptiles and
is known to palaeontologists as Trachodon or more popularly as the
'duck-billed dinosaur.'

"The skeleton or hard parts of these very remarkable animals had been
known for over forty years, and a few specimens of the epidermal
covering, but it was not until the discovery of the Sternberg specimen
that a complete knowledge of the outer covering of these dinosaurs was
gained. It appears probable that in a number of cases these priceless
skin impressions were mostly destroyed in removing the fossil
specimens from their surroundings because the explorers were not
expecting to find anything of the kind. Altogether seven specimens
have been discovered in which these delicate skin impressions were
partly preserved, but the 'Trachodon mummy' far surpasses all the
others, as it yields a nearly complete picture of the outer covering.

"The reason the Sternberg specimen (Trachodon annectens) may be
known as a dinosaur 'mummy' is that in all the parts of the animal
which are preserved (i.e. all except the hind limbs and the tail),
the epidermis is shrunken around the limbs, tightly drawn along the
bony surfaces, and contracted like a great curtain below the chest
area. This condition of the epidermis suggests the following theory of
the deposition and preservation of this wonderful specimen, namely:
that after dying a natural death the animal was not attacked or preyed
upon by its enemies, and the body lay exposed to the sun entirely
undisturbed for a long time, perhaps upon a broad sand flat of a
stream in the low-water stage; the muscles and viscera thus became
completely dehydrated, or desiccated by the action of the sun, the
epidermis shrank around the limbs, was tightly drawn down along all
the bony surfaces, and became hardened and leathery, on the abdominal
surfaces the epidermis was certainly drawn within the body cavity,
while it was thrown into creases and folds along the sides of the body
owing to the shrinkage of the tissues within. At the termination of a
possible low-water season during which these processes of desiccation
took place, the 'mummy' may have been caught in a sudden flood,
carried down the stream and rapidly buried in a bed of fine river sand
intermingled with sufficient elements of clay to take a perfect cast
or mold of all the epidermal markings before any of the epidermal
tissues had time to soften under the solvent action of the water. In
this way the markings were indicated with absolute distinctness, ...
the visitor will be able by the use of the hand glass to study even
the finer details of the pattern, although of course there is no trace
either of the epidermis itself, which has entirely disappeared, or of
the pigmentation or coloring, if such existed.

"Although attaining a height of fifteen to sixteen feet the trachodons
were not covered with scales or a bony protecting armature, but with
dermal tubercles of relatively small size, which varied in shape and
arrangement in different species, and not improbably associated with
this varied epidermal pattern there was a varied color pattern. The
theory of a color pattern is based chiefly upon the fact that the
larger tubercles concentrate and become more numerous on all those
portions of the body exposed to the sun, that is, on the outer
surfaces of the fore and hind limbs, and appear to increase also along
the sides of the body and to be more concentrated on the back. On the
less exposed areas, the under side of the body and the inner sides of
the limbs, the smaller tubercles are more numerous, the larger
tubercles being reduced to small irregularly arranged patches. From
analogy with existing lizards and snakes we may suppose, therefore,
that the trachodons presented a darker appearance when seen from the
back and a lighter appearance when seen from the front.

  der side of body. After Osborn]

  odon. The impressions appear to have been left by horny
  scutes or scales, not overlapping like the scales on the body of
  most modern reptiles, but more like the scutes on the head of a
  lizard.]

  omparison of surface with skin impressions of Trachodon.
  Enlarged to 4/3.]

"The thin character of the epidermis as revealed by this specimen
favors also the theory that these animals spent a large part of their
time in the water, which theory is strengthened by the fact that the
diminutive fore limb terminates not in claws or hoofs, but in a broad
extension of the skin, reaching beyond the fingers and forming a kind
of paddle. The marginal web which connects all the fingers with
each other, together with the fact that the lower side of the fore
limb is as delicate in its epidermal structure as the upper,
certainly tends to support the theory of the swimming rather than the
walking or terrestrial function of this fore paddle as indicated in
the accompanying preliminary restoration that was made by Charles R.
Knight working under the writer's direction. One is drawn in the
conventional bipedal or standing posture while the other is in a
quadrupedal pose or walking position, sustaining or balancing the fore
part of the body on a muddy surface with its fore feet. In the distant
water a large number of animals are disporting themselves.

"The designation of these animals as the 'duck-billed' dinosaurs in
reference to the broadening of the beak, has long been considered in
connection with the theory of aquatic habitat. The conversion of the
fore limb into a sort of paddle, as evidenced by the Sternberg
specimen, strengthens this theory.

"This truly wonderful specimen, therefore, nearly doubles our previous
insight into the habits and life of a very remarkable group of
reptiles."

Saurolophus, Corythosaurus. In the latest Cretaceous formation, the
Lance or Triceratops beds, all the duck-billed dinosaurs are much
alike, and are referred to the single genus Trachodon. In somewhat
older formations of the Cretacic period there were several different
kinds. Saurolophus has a high bony spine rising from the top of the
skull; in Corythosaurus there is a thin high crest like the crown of
a cassowary on top of the skull, and the muzzle is short and small
giving a very peculiar aspect to the head. Complete skeletons of these
two genera are exhibited in the Dinosaur Hall; the Corythosaurus is
worthy of careful study, as the skin of the body, hind limbs and tail,
the ossified tendons, and even the impressions of the muscular tissues
in parts of the body and tail, are more or less clearly indicated.

  ACIC OF ALBERTA. After Brown]

These Duck-billed Dinosaurs probably ranged all over North America and
the northerly portions of the Old World during the later Cretacic.
Fragmentary remains have been found in New Jersey and southward along
the Atlantic coast. A partial skeleton was described many years ago by
Leidy under the name of Hadrosaurus and restored and mounted in the
museum of the Philadelphia Academy of Sciences. Telmatosaurus of the
Gosau formation in Austria also belongs to this group, and fragmentary
remains have been found in the upper Cretacic of Belgium, England and
France.

FOOTNOTES:

: Brown, Barnum. "The Trachodon Group." Amer. Mus. Jour.
Vol. viii, pp. 51-56, plate and 3 text figs., 1908.]

: Osborn, Henry Fairfield, "Dinosaur Mummy" Amer. Mus.
Jour. Vol. xi, pp. 7-11, illustrated, Jan. 1911.]

: There is some doubt whether this was really the
condition during life. W.D.M.]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE BEAKED DINOSAURS (Continued.)

C. THE ARMORED DINOSAURS--STEGOSAURUS, ANKYLOSAURUS.

Sub-Order Stegosauria.


This group of dinosaurs is most remarkable for the massive bony armor
plates, crests or spines covering the body and tail. They were more or
less completely quadrupedal instead of bipedal, with straight
post-like limbs and short rounded hoofed feet adapted to support the
weight of the massive body and heavy armature. Although so different
superficially from the bird-footed biped Iguanodonts they are
evidently related to them, for the teeth are similar, and the horny
beak, the construction of the pelvis, the three-toed hind foot and
four-toed front foot all betray relationship. From what we know of
them it seems probable that they evolved from Iguanodont ancestors,
developing the bony armor as a protection against the attacks of
carnivorous dinosaurs, and modifying the proportions of limbs and feet
to enable them to support its weight. They were evidently herbivorous
and some of them of gigantic size. Smaller kinds with less massive
armor have been found in Europe but the largest and most extraordinary
members of this strange race are from North America.


STEGOSAURUS.

This extraordinary reptile equalled the Allosaurus in size, and bore
along the crest of the back a double row of enormous bony plates
projecting upward and somewhat outward alternately to one side and the
other. The largest of these plates situated just back of the pelvis
were over two feet high, two and a half long, thinning out from a base
four inches thick. The tail was armed with four or more stout spines
two feet long and five or six inches thick at the base. In the neck
region and probably elsewhere the skin had numerous small bony nodules
and some larger ones imbedded in its substance or protecting its
surface. The head was absurdly small for so huge an animal, and the
stiff thick tail projected backward but was not long enough to reach
the ground. The hind limbs are very long and straight, the fore limbs
relatively short, and the short high arched back and extremely deep
and compressed body served to exaggerate the height and prominence of
the great plates. The surface of these plates, covered with a network
of blood-vessels, shows that they bore a covering of thick horny skin
during life, which probably projected as a ridge beyond their edges
and still further increased their size. The spines of the tail, also,
were probably cased in horn.

This extraordinary animal was a contemporary of the Brontosaurus and
Allosaurus, and its discovery was one of the great achievements of the
late Professor Marsh. The skeletons which he described are mounted in
the Yale and National Museums. Another skeleton was found in the
famous Bone-Cabin Quarry, near Medicine Bow, Wyoming, by the American
Museum Expedition of 1901. This skeleton, at present withdrawn from
lack of space, will be mounted in the Jurassic Dinosaur Hall in the
new wing now under construction.

  Ankylosaurus, from Upper Cretacic (Edmonton formation) of
  Alberta. Left side view. After Brown]


ANKYLOSAURUS.

Related to Stegosaurus, equally huge, but very different in
proportions and character of its armor was the Ankylosaurus of the
late Cretacic. This animal, a contemporary of the Tyrannosaurus and
duck-billed dinosaurs was more effectively though less grotesquely
armored than its more ancient relative. The body is covered with
massive bony plates set close together and lying flat over the surface
from head to tip of tail. While the stegosaur's body was narrow and
compressed, in this animal it is exceptionally broad and the wide
spreading ribs are coössified with the vertebrae, making a very solid
support for the transverse rows of armor plates. The head is broad
triangular, flat topped and solidly armored, the plates consolidated
with the surface of the skull and overhanging sides and front, the
nostrils and eyes overhung by plates and bosses of bone; and the tail
ended in a blunt heavy club of massive plates consolidated to each
other and to the tip of the tail vertebrae. The legs were short,
massive and straight, ending probably in elephant-like feet. The
animal has well been called "the most ponderous animated citadel the
world has ever seen" and we may suppose that when it tucked in its
legs and settled down on the surface it would be proof even against
the attacks of the terrible Tyrannosaur.

  35. After Brown]

This marvellous animal was made known to science by the discoveries of
the Museum parties in Montana and Alberta under Barnum Brown.
Fragmentary remains of smaller relatives had been discovered by
earlier explorers but nothing that gave any adequate notion of its
character or gigantic size. From a partial skeleton discovered in the
Hell Creek beds of Montana, and others in the Edmonton and Belly River
formations of the Red Deer River, Alberta, it has been possible to
reconstruct the entire skeleton of the animal, save for the feet, and
to locate and arrange most of the armor plates exactly. A skeleton
mount from these specimens will shortly be constructed for the
Cretaceous Dinosaur Hall.

Scelidosaurus, Polacanthus, etc. Various armored dinosaurs, of
smaller size and less heavily plated, have been described from the
Jurassic, Comanchic and Cretacic formations of Europe. The best known
are Scelidosaurus of the Lower Jurassic of England, and
Polacanthus of the Comanchic (Wealden). Stegopelta of the
Cretaceous of Wyoming is more nearly related to Ankylosaurus.




CHAPTER IX.

THE BEAKED DINOSAURS (Concluded.)

D. THE HORNED DINOSAURS, TRICERATOPS, ETC.

Sub-Order Ceratopsia.


In 1887 Professor Marsh published a brief notice of what he supposed
to be a fossil bison horn found near Denver, Colorado. Two years later
the explorations of the lamented John B. Hatcher in Wyoming and
Montana resulted in the unexpected discovery that this horn belonged
not to a bison but to a gigantic horned reptile, and that it belonged
not in the geological yesterday as at first thought, but in the far
back Cretacic, millions of years ago. For Mr. Hatcher found complete
skulls, and later secured skeletons, clearly of the Dinosaurian group,
but representing a race of dinosaurs whose existence, or at least
their extraordinary character, had been quite unsuspected. It appeared
indeed that certain teeth and skeleton bones previously discovered by
Professor Cope were related to this new type of dinosaur, but the
fragments known to the Philadelphia professor gave him no idea of what
the animal was like, although with his usual acumen he had discerned
that they differed from any animal known to science and registered
them as new under the names of Agathaumas 1873 and Monoclonius
1876. Professor Marsh re-named his supposed bison "Ceratops" (i.e.
"horned face") and gave to the closely related skulls discovered by
Mr. Hatcher the name of Triceratops (i.e. "three horned face"),
while to the whole group he gave the name of Ceratopsia.

  w, Ceratops, Styracosaurus, Monoclonius, are from the
  Middle Cretacic (Belly River formation) of Alberta;
  Anchiceratops is from the Upper Cretacic (Edmonton formation) of
  Alberta; Triceratops and Torosaurus from the uppermost
  Cretacic (Lance formation) of Wyoming.]

These were the first of a long series of discoveries which through
scientific and popular descriptions have made the Horned Dinosaurs
familiar to the world. Most of them are still very imperfectly known,
and of their evolution and earlier history we know very little as yet.
But we can form a fairly correct idea of their general appearance and
habits and of the part they played in the world of the late Cretacic.
So far as known they were limited to North America. The most striking
feature of the Horned Dinosaurs is the gigantic skull, armed with a
pair of horns over the orbits and a median horn on the nasal bones in
front, and with a great bony crest projecting at the back and sides.
In some species the skull with its bony frill attains a length of
seven or even eight feet and about three feet width; the usual length
is five or six feet and the width about three. In the best known
genus, Triceratops, the paired horns are long and stout and the
front horn quite short or almost absent, while in Monoclonius these
proportions are reversed, the front horn being long while the paired
horns are rudimentary.

The teeth are in a single row but are broadened out into a wide
grinding surface. The animal was quadrupedal, with short massive limbs
and rounded elephantine feet tipped with hoofs, three in the hind
foot, four in the fore foot, a short massive tail that could hardly
reach the ground, a short broad-barrelled body and a short neck
completely hidden on top and sides by the overhanging bony frill of
the skull. In many respects these animals are suggestive far more than
any other dinosaurs, of the great quadrupeds of Tertiary and modern
times, rhinoceroses, hippopotami, titanotheres and elephants, as in
the horns they suggest the bison. For this reason although less
gigantic than the Brontosaurus or Tyrannosaurus, less grotesque
perhaps, than the Stegosaurus, they are more interesting than any
other dinosaurs. While thus departing far from the earlier type of the
beaked dinosaurs (the Iguanodonts) they are evidently descended from
them.

  ation in Wyoming, one-eighteenth natural size. The length of
  the horns is 2 feet, 9-1/2 inches. The rostral bone or beak, and
  the lower jaw, are lacking; in the illustration on the cover they
  have been restored in outline. This fine skull was discovered by
  George M. Sternberg, and purchased for the Museum by Mr. Charles
  Lanier in 1909.]


TRICERATOPS.

This is the best known of the Horned Dinosaurs, as various skulls and
partial skeletons have been found from which it has been possible to
reconstruct the entire animal. There is a mounted skeleton in the
National Museum, another will shortly be mounted in the American
Museum, and there are skulls in several American and European
museums.

Triceratops exceeded the largest rhinoceroses in bulk, equalling a
fairly large elephant, but with much shorter legs. The great horns
over the eyes projected forward or partly upward; in one of our skulls
they are 33-1/2 inches long. During life they were probably covered
with horn increasing the length by six inches or perhaps a foot. The
ball-like condyle for articulation of the neck lies far underneath, at
the base of the frill, almost in the middle of the skull.

  from the Cretacic (Belly River formation) of Alberta.
  One-fifteenth natural size. The horns over the eyes are
  rudimentary, and the nasal horn large, reversing the proportions
  in Triceratops.]

Monoclonius, Ceratops, etc. The Triceratops and another equally
gigantic Horned Dinosaur, Torosaurus, were the last survivors of
their race. In somewhat older formations of Cretacic age are found
remains of smaller kinds, some of them ancestors of these latest
survivors, others collaterally related. None of these have the bony
frill completely roofing over the neck as it does in Triceratops.
There is always a central spine projecting backwards and widening out
at the top to the bony margin of the frill which sweeps around on each
side to join bony plates that project from the sides of the skull top.
This encloses an open space or "fenestra," so that the neck was not
completely protected above. Sometimes the margin of the frill is
plain, at other times it carries a number of great spikes, like a
gigantic Horned Lizard (Phrynosoma).

  s, from the mounted skeleton in the National Museum.]

In Ceratops the horns over the eyes are large and the nasal horn
small. In Monoclonius the nasal horn is large and those over the
eyes are rudimentary. The great variety of species that has been found
in recent years shows that these Horned Dinosaurs were a numerous and
varied race of which as yet we know only a few. Of their evolution we
have little direct knowledge, but probably they are descended from the
Iguanodonts and Camptosaurs of the Comanchic, and their quadrupedal
gait, huge heads, short tails and other peculiarities are secondary
specializations, their ancestors being bipedal, long-tailed, small
headed and hornless.

The fine skulls of Triceratops, Monoclonius, Ceratops and
Anchiceratops in the Museum collections illustrate the variety of
these remarkable animals. Complete skeletons of the first two genera
are being prepared for mounting and exhibition.




CHAPTER X.

GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF DINOSAURS.


Remains of Dinosaurs have been found in all the continents, but
chiefly in Europe and North America. Explorations in other parts of
the world have not as yet been sufficient to show whether or not each
continent developed especial kinds peculiar to it, nor to afford any
reliable evidence as to whether the relations of the continents were
different during the Mesozoic. Thus far, the Carnivorous group seems
most widespread, for it alone has been found in Australia. The
Sauropods or Amphibious Dinosaurs have been found in Europe, North
America, India, Madagascar, Patagonia, and Africa, sufficient to show
that their distribution was world wide with the possible exception of
Australia, and probable exception of most oceanic islands (few of the
modern oceanic islands existed at that time although there may well
have been many others no longer extant). The Beaked Dinosaurs are more
limited in their distribution, for none of them so far as at present
known reached Australia or South America. But in the present stage of
discovery it would be rash to conclude that they were surely limited
to the regions where they have been discovered. It is not wholly
clear as yet whether the Dinosaurian fauna that flourished at the end
of the Jurassic in the north survived to the Upper Cretacic in the
southern continents, but present evidence points that way, and
indicates that the girdle of ocean which during the Cretacic
depression encircled the northern world, formed a barrier which the
Cretacic dinosaurian fauna never succeeded in crossing.

The earlier groups of Beaked Dinosaurs are found in both Europe and
America, and in the Cretacic the Duck-billed and Armored groups are
represented in both regions. The Horned Dinosaurs, however, are known
with certainty only from North America.

While most of the important fossil specimens in this country have been
found in the West, more fragmentary remains have been found on the
Atlantic sea-board, and it is probable that they ranged all over the
intervening region, wherever they found an environment suited to their
particular needs.




CHAPTER XI.

COLLECTING DINOSAURS.

HOW AND WHERE THEY ARE FOUND.


The visitor who is introduced to the dinosaurs through the medium of
books and pictures or of the skeletons exhibited in the great museums,
finds it hard--well nigh impossible--to realize their existence.
However willing he may be to accept on faith the reconstructions of
the skeletons, the restorations of the animals and their supposed
environment, it yet remains to him somewhat of a fairy-tale, a
fanciful imaginative world peopled with ogres and dragons and
belonging to the unreal "once upon a time" which has no connection
with the ever present workaday world in which we live. Birds and
squirrels, rabbits and foxes belong to this real world because he has
seen them in his walks through the woods; even elephants and
rhinoceroses, though his acquaintance be limited to menagerie
specimens, seem fairly real--although one recalls the farmer's comment
on first seeing a giraffe in the Zoological park: "There aint no sich
animal." But dinosaurs--one easily realizes the state of mind that
prompts the inquiry so often made by visitors to the Dinosaur
Hall:--"they make these out of plaster, don't they?" So far as is
consistent with good taste, the aim of the American Museum has been
to enable the visitor to see for himself how much of plaster
reconstruction there is to each skeleton, and to explain in the labels
what the basis was for the reconstructed parts.

How They are Found. But to the collector these extinct animals are
real enough. As he journeys over the western plains he sees the
various living inhabitants thereof, birds and beasts, as well as men,
pursuing their various modes of life; here and there he comes across
the scattered skeletons or bones of modern animals lying strewn upon
the surface of the ground or half buried in the soil of a cut bank. In
the shales or sandstones that underlie the soil he finds the objects
of his search, skeletons or bones of extinct animals, similarly
disposed, but buried in rock instead of soft soil, and exposed in
cañons and gullies cut through the solid rock. Each rock formation, he
knows by precept and experience, carries its own peculiar fauna, its
animals are different from those of the formation above and from those
in the formation below. Days and weeks he may spend in fruitless
search following along the outcrop of the formation, through rugged
badlands, along steep cañon walls, around isolated points or buttes,
without finding more than a few fragments, but spurred on by vivid
interest and the rainbow prospect of some new or rare find. Finally
perhaps, after innumerable disappointments, a trail of fragments leads
up to a really promising prospect. A cautious investigation indicates
that an articulated skeleton is buried at this point, and that not
too much of it has "gone out" and rolled in weathered fragments down
the slope. For the tedious and delicate process of disinterring the
skeleton from the rock he will need to keep ever in mind the form and
relations of each bone, the picture of the skeleton as it may have
been when buried. The heavy ledges above are removed with pick and
shovel, often with help of dynamite and a team and scraper. As he gets
nearer to the stratum in which the bones lie the work must be more and
more careful. A false blow with pick or chisel might destroy
irreparably some important bony structure. Bit by bit he traces out
the position and lay of the bones, working now mostly with awl and
whisk-broom, uncovering the more massive portions, blocking out the
delicate bones in the rock, soaking the exposed surfaces repeatedly
with thin "gum" (mucilage) or shellac, channeling around and between
the bones until they stand out on little pedestals above the quarry
floor. Then, after the gum or shellac has dried thoroughly and
hardened the soft parts, and the surfaces of bone exposed are further
protected by pasting on a layer of tissue paper, it is ready for the
"plaster jacket." This consists of strips of burlap dipped in
plaster-of-paris and pasted over the surface of each block until top
and sides, all but the pedestal on which it rests, are completely
cased in, the strips being pressed and kneaded close to the surface of
the block as they are laid on. When this jacket sets and dries the
block is rigid and stiff enough to lift and turn over; the remains of
the pedestal are trimmed off and the under surface is plastered like
the rest. With large blocks it is often necessary to paste into the
jacket, on upper or both sides, boards, scantling or sticks of wood to
secure additional rigidity. For should the block "rack," or become
shattered inside, even though no fragments were lost, the specimen
would be more or less completely ruined.

    for encasing in plaster bandages and removal in blocks.
  (Corythosaurus, Red Deer River, Alberta.)]

The next stage will be packing in boxes with straw, hay or other
materials, hauling to the railway and shipment to New York.

Arrived at the Museum, the boxes are unpacked, each block laid out on
a table, the upper side of its plaster jacket softened with water and
cut away, and the preparation of the bone begins. Always it is more or
less cracked and broken up, but the fragments lie in their natural
relations. Each piece must be lifted out, thoroughly cleaned from rock
and dirt, and the fractured surfaces cemented together again. Parts of
bones, especially the interior, are often rotted into dust while the
harder outer surface is still preserved. The dust must be scraped out,
the interior filled with a plaster cement, and the surface pieces
re-set in position. Very often a steel rod is set into the plaster
filling the interior of a bone, to secure additional strength.

After this preparation is completed, each part being soaked repeatedly
with shellac until it will absorb no more, the bones can be handled
and laid out for study or exhibition. Then, if they are to be mounted
for a fossil skeleton, comes the work of restoring the missing parts.
For this a plaster composition is used.

Where only parts of one side are missing the corresponding parts of
the other side are used for model; where both sides are missing, other
individuals or nearly related species may serve as a guide. But it is
seldom wise to attempt restoration of a skeleton unless at least
two-thirds of it is present; composite skeletons made up of the
remains of several or many individuals, have been attempted, but they
are dangerous experiments in animals so imperfectly known as are most
of the dinosaurs. There is too much risk of including bones that
pertain to other species or genera, and of introducing thereby into
the restoration a more or less erroneous concept of the animal which
it represents. The same criticism applies to an overly large amount of
plaster restoration.

   north of Medicine Bow, Wyoming. The location of the quarry is
  indicated by the stack of crated specimens on the left, and close
  to it the low sod-covered shack where the collecting party lived.
  Beyond the draw lies the flat rolling surface of the Laramie
  Plains and on the southern horizon the Medicine Bow Range with Elk
  Mountain at the center.]

In some instances the missing parts of a skeleton are not restored,
because, even though but a small part be gone, we have no good
evidence to guide in its reconstruction. This gives an imperfect and
sometimes misleading concept of what the whole skeleton was like, but
it is better than restoring it erroneously. Usually with the more
imperfect skeletons, a skull, a limb or some other characteristic
parts may be placed on exhibition but the remainder of the specimen is
stored in the study collections.

  ry, 1899. Seated, left to right Walter Granger, Professor H.F.
  Osborn, Dr. W.D. Matthew; standing, F. Schneider, Prof. R.S. Lull,
  Albert Thomson, Peter Kaison.]

Where They are Found. The chief dinosaur localities in this country
are along the flanks of the Rocky Mountains and the plains to the
eastward, from Canada to Texas. Not that dinosaurs were any more
abundant there than elsewhere. They probably ranged all over North
America, and different kinds inhabited other continents as well. But
in the East and the Middle West, the conditions were not favorable for
preserving their remains, except in a few localities. Formations of
this age are less extensive, especially those of the delta and
coast-swamps which the dinosaurs frequented. And where they do occur,
they are largely covered by vegetation and cannot be explored to
advantage. In the arid Western regions these formations girdle the
Rockies and outlying mountain chains for two-thousand miles from north
to south, and are extensively exposed in great escarpments, river
cañons and "badland" areas, bare of soil and vegetation and affording
an immense stretch of exposed rock for the explorer. Much of this area
indeed is desert, too far away from water to be profitably searched
under present conditions, or too far away from railroads to allow of
transportation of the finds at a reasonable expense. Fossils are much
more common in certain parts of the region, and these localities have
mostly been explored more or less thoroughly. But the field is far
from being exhausted. New localities have been found and old
localities re-explored in recent years, yielding specimens equal to or
better than any heretofore discovered. And as the railroad and the
automobile render new regions accessible, and the erosion of the
formations by wind and rain brings new specimens to the surface, we
may look forward to new discoveries for many years to come.

In other continents, except in Europe, there has been but little
exploration for dinosaurs. Enough is known to assure us that they will
yield faunæ no less extensive and remarkable than our own. We are in
fact only beginning to appreciate the vast extent and variety of these
records of a past world.

In a preceding chapter it was shown that the chief formations in which
dinosaur remains have been found belong to the end of the Jurassic and
the end of the Cretacic periods. The Jurassic dinosaur formations
skirt the Rockies and outlying mountain ranges but are often turned up
on edge and poorly exposed, or barren of fossils. The richest
collecting ground is in the Laramie Plains, between the Rockies and
the Laramie range in south-central Wyoming, but important finds have
also been made in Colorado and Utah. The Cretaceous Dinosaur
formations extend somewhat further out on the plains to the eastward,
and the best collecting regions thus far explored are in eastern
Wyoming, central Montana and in Alberta, Canada.


THE FIRST DISCOVERY OF DINOSAURS IN THE WEST.

By Prof. S.W. Williston.

Most great discoveries are due rather to a state of mind, if I may use
such an expression, than to accident. The discovery of the immense
dinosaur deposits in the Rocky Mountains in March, 1877, may
truthfully be called great, for nothing in paleontology has equalled
it, and that it was made by three observers simultaneously can not be
called purely an accident. These discoverers were Mr. O. Lucas, then
a school teacher, later clergyman; Professor Arthur Lakes, then a
teacher in the School of Mines at Golden, Colorado; and Mr. William
Reed, then a section foreman of the Union Pacific Railroad at Como,
Wyoming, later the curator of paleontology of the University of
Wyoming--even as I write this, comes the notice of his death,--the
last. I knew them all, and the last two were long intimate friends.

In the autumn of 1878 I wrote the following:

"The history of their discovery (the dinosaurs) is both interesting
and remarkable. For years the beds containing them had been studied by
geologists of experience, under the surveys of Hayden and King, but,
with the possible exception of the half of a caudal vertebra, obtained
by Hayden and described by Leidy as a species of Poikilopleuron, not
a single fragment had been recognized. This is all the more remarkable
from the fact that in several of the localities I have observed acres
literally strewn with fragments of bones, many of them extremely
characteristic and so large as to have taxed the strength of a strong
man to lift them. Three of the localities known to me are in the
immediate vicinity, if not upon the actual townsites of thriving
villages, and for years numerous fragments have been collected by (or
for) tourists and exhibited as fossil wood. The quantities hitherto
obtained, though apparently so vast, are wholly unimportant in
comparison with those awaiting the researches of geologists throughout
the Rocky Mountain region. I doubt not that many hundreds of tons will
eventually be exhumed." Rather a startling prophecy to make within
eighteen months of their discovery, but it was hardly exaggerated.

It is impossible to say which of these three observers actually made
the first discovery of Jurassic dinosaurs; whatever doubt there is is
in favor of Mr. Reed.

Professor Lakes, accompanied by his friend Mr. E.L. Beckwith, an
engineer, was, one day in March, 1877, hunting along the "hogback" in
the vicinity of Morrison, Colorado, for fossil leaves in the Dakota
Cretaceous sandstone which caps the ridge, when he saw a large block
of sandstone with an enormous vertebra partly imbedded in it. He
discussed the nature of the fossil with his friend (so he told me) and
finally concluded that it was a fossil bone. He had recently come from
England and had heard of Professor Phillips' discoveries of similar
dinosaurs there. He knew of Professor Marsh of Yale from his recent
discoveries of toothed birds in the chalk of Kansas, and reported the
find to him. As a result, the specimen, rock and all, was shipped to
him by express at ten cents a pound! And Professor Marsh immediately
announced the discovery of Titanosaurus (Atlantosaurus) immanis,
a huge dinosaur having a probable length of one hundred and fifteen
feet and unknown height. And Professor Lakes was immediately set at
work in the "Morrison quarry" near by, whence comes the accepted name
of these dinosaur beds in the Rocky Mountains. Professor Lakes once
showed me the exact spot where he found his first specimen.

Mr. Lucas, teaching his first term of a country school that spring in
Garden Park near Cañon City, as an amateur botanist was interested in
the plants of the vicinity. Rambling through the adjacent hills in
search of them, in March, 1877, he stumbled upon some fragments of
fossil bones in a little ravine not far from the famous quarry later
worked for Professor Marsh. He recognized them as fossils and they
greatly excited, not only his curiosity, but the curiosity of the
neighbors. He had heard of the late Professor Cope and sent some of
the bones to him, who promptly labelled them Camarasaurus supremus.

The announcement of these discoveries promptly brought Mr. David
Baldwin, Professor Marsh's collector in New Mexico, to the scene. Only
a few months previously he had discovered fossil bones in the red beds
of New Mexico, the since famous Permian deposits. He naturally
explored the same beds at Cañon City, immediately below the dinosaur
deposits, and soon found the still very problematical Hallopus
skeleton, at their very top, a specimen which after nearly forty years
remains unique of its kind.

A few years earlier Professor Marsh, on his way east from the Tertiary
deposits of western Wyoming, had stopped at Como, Wyoming, to observe
the strange salamanders, or "fish with legs" as they were widely
known, so abundant in the lake at that place, about whose
transformations he later wrote a paper, perhaps the only one on modern
vertebrates that he ever published. While he was there Mr. Carlin, the
station agent, showed him some fossil bone fragments, so Mr. Reed told
me, that they had picked up in the vicinity, and about which Professor
Marsh made some comments. But he was so engrossed with the other
discoveries he was then making that he did not follow up the
suggestion. Had he done so the discovery of the "Jurassic Dinosaurs"
would have been made five years earlier.

Mr. Reed, tramping over the famous Como hills after game--he had been
a professional hunter of game for the construction camps of the Union
Pacific Railroad--in the winter and spring of 1877, observed some
fossil bones just south of the railway station that excited his
curiosity. But he and Mr. Carlin did not make their discovery known to
Professor Marsh till the following autumn, and then under assumed
names, fearing that they would be robbed of their discovery. I was
sent to Como in November of 1877 from Cañon City. I got off the train
at the station after midnight, and enquired for the nearest
hotel--(the station comprised two houses only), and where I could find
Messrs. Smith and Robinson. I was told that the section house was the
only hotel in the place and that these gentlemen lived in the country
and that there was no regular bus-line yet running to their ranch. A
freshly opened box of cigars, however, helped clear up things, and I
joined Mr. Reed the next day in opening "Quarry No. 1" of the Como
hills. Inasmuch as the mercury in the thermometer during the next two
months seldom reached zero--upward I mean--the opening of this famous
deposit was made under difficulties. That so much "head cheese," as we
called it, was shipped to Professor Marsh was more the fault of the
weather and his importunities than our carelessness. However, we found
some of the types of dinosaurs that have since become famous.

I joined Professor Lakes at the Morrison quarry in early September of
1877, and helped dig out some of the bones of Atlantosaurus. A few
weeks later I was sent to Cañon City to help Professor Mudge, my old
teacher, and Mr. Felch, who had begun work there in the famous "Marsh
Quarry". It was here that we found the type of Diplodocus.

The hind leg, pelvis and much of the tail of this specimen lay in very
orderly arrangement in the sandstone near the edge of the quarry, but
the bones were broken into innumerable pieces. After consultation we
decided that they were too much broken to be worth saving--and so most
of them went over into the dump. Sacrilege, doubtless, the modern
collector will say, but we did not know much about the modern methods
of collecting in those days, and moreover we were in too much of a
hurry to get the new discoveries to Yale College to take much pains
with them. I did observe that the caudal vertebrae had very peculiar
chevrons, unlike others that I had seen, and so I attempted to save
some samples of them by pasting them up with thick layers of paper.
Had we only known of plaster-of-paris and burlap the whole specimen
might easily have been saved. Later, when I reached New Haven, I took
off the paper and called Professor Marsh's attention to the strange
chevrons. And Diplodocus was the result.

  e-Cabin Quarry. Hind limb of Diplodocus.]

My own connection with the discoveries of these old dinosaurs
continued only through the following summer, in Wyoming, when we added
the first mammals from the hills immediately back of the station, and
the types of some of the smaller dinosaurs, and when we explored the
vicinity for other deposits, on Rock Creek and in the Freeze Out
Mountains.

How many tons of these fossils have since been dug up from these
deposits in the Rocky Mountains is beyond computation. My prophecy of
hundreds of tons has been fulfilled; and they are preserved in many
museums of the world.

                    S.W. WILLISTON.


THE DINOSAURS OF THE BONE-CABIN QUARRY.

By Henry Fairfield Osborn.

One is often asked the questions: "How do you find fossils?" "How do
you know where to look for them?" One of the charms of the
fossil-hunter's life is the variety, the element of certainty combined
with the gambling element of chance. Like the prospector for gold, the
fossil-hunter may pass suddenly from the extreme of dejection to the
extreme of elation. Luck comes in a great variety of ways: sometimes
as the result of prolonged and deliberate scientific search in a
region which is known to be fossiliferous; sometimes in such a prosaic
manner as the digging of a well. Among discoveries of a highly
suggestive, almost romantic kind, perhaps none is more remarkable than
the one I shall now describe.

Discovery of the Great Dinosaur Quarry. In central Wyoming, at the
head of a "draw," or small valley, not far from the Medicine Bow
River, lies the ruin of a small and unique building, which marks the
site of the greatest "find" of extinct animals made in a single
locality in any part of the world. The fortunate fossil-hunter who
stumbled on this site was Mr. Walter Granger of the American Museum
expedition of 1897.

In the spring of 1898, as I approached the hillock on which the ruin
stands, I observed, among the beautiful flowers, the blooming cacti,
and the dwarf bushes of the desert, what were apparently numbers of
dark-brown boulders. On closer examination, it proved that there is
really not a single rock, hardly even a pebble, on this hillock; all
these apparent boulders are ponderous fossils which have slowly
accumulated or washed out on the surface from a great dinosaur bed
beneath. A Mexican sheep-herder had collected some of these petrified
bones for the foundations of his cabin, the first ever built of such
strange materials. The excavation of a promising outcrop was almost
immediately rewarded by finding a thigh-bone nearly six feet in length
which sloped downward into the earth, running into the lower leg and
finally into the foot, with all the respective parts lying in the
natural position as in life. This proved to be the previously unknown
hind limb of the great dinosaur Diplodocus.

In this manner the "Bone-Cabin Quarry" was discovered and christened.
The total contents of the quarry are represented in the diagram (not
reprinted.) It has given us, by dint of six successive years of hard
work, the materials for an almost complete revival of the life of the
Laramie region as it was in the days of the dinosaurs. By the aid of
workmen of every degree of skill, by grace of the accumulated wisdom
of the nineteenth century, by the constructive imagination, by the aid
of the sculptor and the artist, we can summon these living forms and
the living environment from the vasty deep of the past.

The Famous Como Bluffs. The circumstances leading up to our
discovery serve to introduce the story. From 1890 to 1897 we had been
steadily delving into the history of the Age of Mammals, in deposits
dating from two hundred thousand to three million years back, as we
rudely estimate geological time. In the course of seven years such
substantial progress had been made that I decided to push into the
history of the Age of Reptiles also, and, following the pioneers,
Marsh and Cope, to begin exploration in the period which at once marks
the dawn of mammalian life and the climax of the evolution of the
great amphibious dinosaurs.

In the spring of 1897 we accordingly began exploration in the heart of
the Laramie Plains, on the Como Bluffs. On arrival, we found numbers
of massive bones strewn along the base of these bluffs, tumbled from
their stratum above, too weather-worn to attract collectors, and
serving only to remind one of the time when these animals--the
greatest, by far, that nature has ever produced on land--were monarchs
of the world.

Aroused from sleep on a clear evening in camp by the heavy rumble of
a passing Union Pacific freight-train, I shall never forget my
meditations on the contrast between the imaginary picture of the great
Age of Dinosaurs, fertile in cycads and in a wonderful variety of
reptiles, and the present age of steam, of heavy locomotives toiling
through the semi-arid and partly desert Laramie Plains.

So many animals had already been removed from these bluffs that we
were not very sanguine of finding more; but after a fortnight our
prospecting was rewarded by finding parts of skeletons of the
long-limbed dinosaur Diplodocus and of the heavy-limbed dinosaur
Brontosaurus. The whole summer was occupied in taking these animals
out for shipment to the East, the so-called "plaster method" of
removal being applied with the greatest success. Briefly, this is a
surgical device applied on a large scale for the "setting" of the
much-fractured bones of a fossilized skeleton. It consists in setting
great blocks of the skeleton, stone and all, in a firm capsule of
plaster subsequently reinforced by great splints of wood, firmly drawn
together with wet rawhide. The object is to keep all the fragments and
splinters of bone together until it can reach the skilful hands of the
museum preparator.

The Rock Waves Connecting the Bluffs and the Quarry. The Como Bluffs
are about ten miles south of the Bone-Cabin Quarry; between them is a
broad stretch of the Laramie Plains. The exposed bone layer in the two
localities is of the same age, and originally was a continuous level
stratum which may be designated as the "dinosaur beds;" but this
stratum, disturbed and crowded by the uplifting of the not far-distant
Laramie range of mountains and the Freeze Out Hills, was thrown into a
number of great folds or rock waves. Large portions, especially of the
upfolds, or "anticlines," of the waves, have been subsequently removed
by erosion; the edges of these upfolds have been exposed, thus
weathering out their fossilized contents, while downfolds are still
buried beneath the earth for the explorers of coming centuries.

Therefore, as one rides across the country to-day from the bluffs to
the quarry, startling the intensely modern fauna, the prong-horn
antelopes, jack-rabbits, and sage-chickens, he is passing over a vast
graveyard which has been profoundly folded and otherwise shaken up and
disturbed. Sometimes one finds the bone layer removed entirely,
sometimes horizontal, sometimes oblique, and again dipping directly
into the heart of the earth. This layer (dinosaur beds) is not more
than two hundred and seventy-four feet in thickness, and is altogether
of fresh-water origin; but as a proof of the oscillations of the
earth-level both before and after this great thin sheet of fresh-water
rock was so widely spread, there are evidences of the previous
invasion of the sea (ichthyosaur beds) and of the subsequent invasion
of the sea (mosasaur beds) in the whole Rocky Mountain region.

In traveling through the West, when once one has grasped the idea of
continental oscillation, or submergence and emergence of the land, of
the sequence of the marine and fresh-water deposits in laying down
these pages of earth-history, he will know exactly where to look for
this wonderful layer-bed of the giant dinosaurs; he will find that,
owing to the uplift of various mountain-ranges, it outcrops along the
entire eastern face of the Rockies, around the Black Hills, and in all
parts of the Laramie Plains; it yields dinosaur bones everywhere, but
by no means so profusely or so perfectly as in the two famous
localities we are describing.

How the Skeletons Lie in the Bluffs and Quarry. At the bluffs single
animals lie from twenty to one hundred feet apart; one rarely finds a
whole skeleton, such as that of Marsh's Brontosaurus excelsus, the
finest specimen ever secured here, which is now one of the treasures
of the Yale museum. More frequently a half or a third of a skeleton
lies together.

In the Bone-Cabin Quarry, on the other hand, we came across a
veritable Noah's-ark deposit, a perfect museum of all the animals of
the period. Here are the largest of the giant dinosaurs closely
mingled with the remains of the smaller but powerful carnivorous
dinosaurs which preyed upon them, also those of the slow and
heavy-moving armored dinosaurs of the period, as well as of the
lightest and most bird-like of the dinosaurs. Finely rounded, complete
limbs from eight to ten feet in length are found, especially those of
the carnivorous dinosaurs, perfect even to the sharply pointed and
recurved tips of their toes. Other limbs and bones are so crushed and
distorted by pressure that it is not worth while removing them.
Sixteen series of vertebræ were found strung together; among these
were eight long strings of tail-bones. The occurrence of these tails
is less surprising when we come to study the important and varied
functions of the tail in these animals, and the consequent connection
of the tail-bones by means of stout tendons and ligaments which held
them together for a long period after death. Skulls are fragile and
rare in the quarry, because in every one of these big skeletons there
were no fewer than ninety distinct bones which exceeded the head in
size, the excess in most cases being enormous.

  Y.
  a. The overlying soil and rocks are loosened with a pick and
  removed with team and scraper down to the fossil layer.

  b. The fossil layer is carefully prospected with small tools,
  chisels, awls and whisk brooms exposing the bones as they lie in
  the rocks.

  c. The blocks containing the fossils are channelled around,
  plastered over top and sides, undercut and carefully turned over
  and the under side trimmed and plastered.

  d. The blocks are then packed in boxes or crates with hay or any
  other available packing material.

  e. Boxes are loaded on wagons and hauled across country to the
  railroad.

  f. Boxes are finally loaded on cars and shipped through to New
  York City.]

The bluffs appear to represent the region of an ancient shoreline,
such conditions as we have depicted in the restoration of
Brontosaurus (fig. 22)--the sloping banks of a muddy estuary or of a
lagoon, either bare tidal flats or covered with vegetation. Evidently
the dinosaurs were buried at or near the spot where they perished.

The Bone-Cabin Quarry deposit represents entirely different
conditions. The theory that it is the accumulation of a flood is, in
my opinion, improbable, because a flood would tend to bring entire
skeletons down together, distribute them widely, and bury them
rapidly. A more likely theory is that this was the area of an old
river-bar, which in its shallow waters arrested the more or less
decomposed and scattered carcasses which had slowly drifted
down-stream toward it, including a great variety of dinosaurs,
crocodiles, and turtles, collected from many points up-stream. Thus
were brought together the animals of a whole region, a fact which
vastly enhances the interest of this deposit.

The Giant Herbivorous Dinosaurs. By far the most imposing of these
animals are those which may be popularly designated as the great or
giant dinosaurs. The name, derived from deinos terrible, and
sauros lizard, refers to the fact that they appeared externally like
enormous lizards, with very long limbs, necks, and tails. They were
actually remotely related to the tuatera lizard of New Zealand, and
still more remotely to the true lizards.

No land animals have ever approached these giant dinosaurs in size,
and naturally the first point of interest is the architecture of the
skeleton. The backbone is indeed a marvel. The fitness of the
construction consists, like that of the American truss-bridge, in
attaining the maximum of strength with the minimum of weight. It is
brought about by dispensing with every cubic millimeter of bone which
can be spared without weakening the vertebræ for the various stresses
and strains to which they were subjected, and these must have been
tremendous in an animal from sixty to seventy feet in length. The
bodies of the vertebræ are of hour-glass shape, with great lateral and
interior cavities; the arches are constructed on the T-iron principle
of the modern bridge-builder, the back spines are tubular, the
interior is spongy, these devices being employed in great variety, and
constituting a mechanical triumph of size, lightness, and strength
combined. Comparing a great chambered dinosaurian (Camarasaurus)
vertebra (see above) with the weight per cubic inch of an ostrich
vertebra, we reach the astonishing conclusion that it weighed only
twenty-one pounds, or half the weight of a whale vertebra of the same
bulk. The skeleton of a whale seventy-four feet in length has recently
been found by Mr. F.A. Lucas of the Brooklyn Museum to weigh seventeen
thousand nine hundred and twenty pounds. The skeleton of a dinosaur of
the same length may be roughly estimated as not exceeding ten thousand
pounds.

Proofs of Rapid Movements on Land. Lightness of skeleton is a
walking or running or flying adaptation, and not at all a swimming
one; a swimming animal needs gravity in its skeleton, because
sufficient buoyancy in the water is always afforded by the lungs and
soft tissues of the body. The extraordinary lightness of these
dinosaur vertebræ may therefore be put forward as proof of supreme
fitness for the propulsion of an enormous frame during occasional
incursions upon land. There are additional facts which point to
land progression, such as the point in the tail where the flexible
structure suddenly becomes rigid, as shown in the diagram of vertebræ
below; the component joints are so solid and flattened on the lower
surface that they seem to demonstrate fitness to support partly the
body in a tripodal position like that of a kangaroo. I have therefore
hazarded the view that even some of these enormous dinosaurs were
capable of raising themselves on their hind limbs, lightly resting on
the middle portion of the tail. In such a position the animal would
have been capable not only of browsing among the higher branches of
trees, but of defending itself against the carnivorous dinosaurs by
using its relatively short but heavy front limbs to ward off attacks.

There are also indications of aquatic habits in some of the giant
dinosaurs which render it probable that a considerable part of their
life was led in the water. One of these indications is the backward
position of the nostrils. Many, but not all, water-living mammals and
reptiles have the nostrils on top of the head, in order to breathe
more readily when the head is partly immersed. Another fact of note,
although perhaps less conclusive, is the fitness of the tail for use
while moving about in the water, if not in rapid swimming.

The great tail, measuring from twenty-eight to thirty feet, was one of
the most remarkable structures in these animals, and undoubtedly
served a great variety of purposes, propelling while in the water,
balancing and supporting and defending while on land. In Diplodocus
it was most perfectly developed from its muscular base to its delicate
and whip-like tip, perhaps for all these functions.

The Three Kinds of Giant Dinosaurs. It is very remarkable that three
distinct kinds of these great dinosaurs lived at the same time in the
same general region, as proved by the fact that their remains are
freely commingled in the quarry.

What were the differences in food and habits, in structure and in
gait, which prevented that direct and active competition between like
types in the struggle for existence which in the course of nature
always leads to the extermination of one or the other type? In the
last three years we have discovered very considerable differences of
structure which make it appear that these animals, while of the same
or nearly the same linear dimensions, did not enter into direct
competition either for food or for territory.

The dinosaur named Diplodocus by Marsh is the most completely known
of the three. Our very first discovery in the Bone-Cabin Quarry gave
us the hint that Diplodocus was distinguished by relatively long,
slender limbs, and that it may be popularly known as the "long-limbed
dinosaur." The great skeleton found in the Como Bluffs enabled me to
restore for the first time the posterior half of one of these animals
estimated as sixty feet in length, the hips and tail especially being
in a perfect state of preservation. A larger animal, nearer seventy
feet in length, including the anterior half of the body, and still
more complete, was discovered about ten miles north of the quarry, and
is now in the Carnegie Museum in Pittsburg. Combined, these two
animals have furnished a complete knowledge of the great bony frame.
The head is only two feet long, and is, therefore, small out of all
proportion to the great body. The neck measures twenty-one feet four
inches, and is by far the longest and largest neck known in any animal
living or extinct. The back is relatively very short, measuring ten
feet eight inches. The vertebræ of the hip measure two feet and three
inches. The tail measures from thirty-two to forty feet. We thus
obtain, as a moderate estimate of the total length of the animal,
sixty-eight to seventy feet. The restored skeleton, published by Mr.
J.B. Hatcher in July, 1901, and partly embodying our results, gave to
science the first really accurate knowledge of the length of these
animals, which hitherto had been greatly overestimated. The highest
point in the body was above the hips; here in fact, was the center of
power and motion, because, as observed above, the tail fairly balanced
the anterior part of the body.

The restoration by Mr. Knight is drawn from a very careful model made
under my direction, in which the proportions of the animal are
precisely estimated. It is, I think, accurate--for a restoration--as
well as interesting and up-to-date. These restorations are the
"working hypotheses" of our science; they express the present state of
our knowledge, and, being subject to modification by future
discoveries, are liable to constant change.

By contrast, the second type of giant dinosaur, the Brontosaurus, or
"thunder saurian" of Marsh, as shown in the restoration (fig. 22), was
far more massive in structure and relatively shorter in body. Five
more or less complete skeletons are now to be seen in the Yale,
American, Carnegie, and Field Columbian museums. In 1898 we discovered
in the bluffs, about three miles west of the Bone-Cabin Quarry, the
largest of these animals which has yet been found; it was worked out
with great care and is now being restored and mounted complete in the
American Museum. The thigh-bone is enormous, measuring five feet eight
inches in length, and is relatively of greater mass than that of
Diplodocus. The neck, chest, hips, and tail are correspondingly
massive. The neck is relatively shorter, however, measuring eighteen
feet, while in Diplodocus it measures over twenty-one feet. The
total length of this massive specimen is estimated at sixty-three
feet, or from six to eight feet less than the largest "long-limbed"
dinosaur. The height of the skeleton at the hips is fifteen feet.
There is less direct evidence that the "thunder saurian" had the power
of raising its fore quarters in the air than in the case of the
"light-limbed saurian," because no bend or supporting point in the
tail has been distinctly observed.

The third type of giant dinosaur is the less completely known
"chambered saurian," the Camarasaurus of Cope or Morosaurus of
Marsh, an animal more quadrupedal in gait or walking more habitually
on all fours, like the great Cetiosaurus, or "whale saurian,"
discovered near Oxford, England. With its shorter tail and heavier
fore limbs, it is still less probable that this animal had the power
of raising the anterior part of its body from the ground. Of a related
type, perhaps, is the largest dinosaur ever found; this is the
Brachiosaurus, limb-bones of which were discovered in central
Colorado in 1901 and are now preserved in the Field Columbian Museum
of Chicago. Its thigh-bone is six feet eight inches in length, and its
upper arm-bone, or humerus, is even slightly longer.

Feeding Habits of the Giant Dinosaurs. We still have to solve one of
the most perplexing problems of fossil physiology; how did the very
small head, provided with light jaws, slender and spoon-shaped teeth
confined to the anterior region, suffice to provide food for these
monsters? I have advanced the idea that the food of Diplodocus
consisted of some very abundant and nutritious species of water-plant;
that the clawed feet were used in uprooting such plants, while the
delicate anterior teeth were employed only for drawing them out of the
water; that the plants were drawn down the throat in large quantities
without mastication, since there were no grinding or back teeth
whatever in this animal. Unfortunately for this theory, it is now
found that the front feet were not provided with many claws, there
being only a single claw on the inner side. Nevertheless by some such
means as this, these enormous animals could have obtained sufficient
food in the water to support their great bulk.

The Carnivorous Dinosaurs. Mingling with the larger bones in the
quarry are the more or less perfect remains of swamp turtles, of dwarf
crocodiles, of the entirely different group of plated dinosaurs, or
Stegosauria, but especially of two entirely distinct kinds of large
and small flesh-eating dinosaurs. The latter rounded out and gave
variety to the dinosaur society, and there is no doubt that they
served the savage but useful purpose, rendered familiar by the
doctrine of Malthus, of checking overpopulation. These fierce animals
had the same remote ancestry as the giant dinosaurs, but had gradually
acquired entirely different habits and appearance.

Far inferior in size, they were superior in agility, exclusively
bipedal, with very long, powerful hind limbs, upon which they advanced
by running or springing, and with short fore limbs, the exact uses of
which are difficult to ascertain. Both hands and feet were provided
with powerful tearing claws. On the hind foot is the back claw, so
characteristic of the birds, which during the Triassic period left its
faint impression almost everywhere in the famous Connecticut valley
imprints of these animals. That the fore limb and hand were of some
distinct use is proved by the enormous size of the thumb-claw; while
the hand may not have conveyed food to the mouth, it may have served
to seize and tear the prey. As to the actual pose in feeding, there
can be little doubt as to its general similarity to that of the
Raptores among the birds, as suggested to me by Dr. Wortman (see
fig. 10); one of the hind feet rested on the prey, the other upon the
ground, the body being further balanced or supported by the vertebræ
of the tail. The animal was thus in a position to apply its teeth and
exert all the power of its very powerful arched back in tearing off
its food. That the gristle of the bone or cartilage was very palatable
is attested not only by the toothmarks upon these bones, but by many
similar markings found in the Bone-Cabin Quarry.

The Bird-Catching Dinosaur. Of all the bird-like dinosaurs which
have been discovered, none possesses greater similitude to the birds
than the gem of the quarry, the little animal about seven feet in
length which we have named Ornitholestes, or the "bird-catching
dinosaur." It was a marvel of speed, agility, and delicacy of
construction. Externally its bones are simple and solid-looking, but
as a matter of fact they are mere shells, the walls being hardly
thicker than paper, the entire interior of the bone having been
removed by the action of the same marvelous law of adaptation which
sculptured the vertebræ of its huge contemporaries. There is no
evidence, however, that these hollow bones were filled with air from
the lungs, as in the case of the bones of birds. The foot is
bird-like; the hand is still more so; in fact, no dinosaur hand has
ever before been found which so closely mimics that of a bird in the
great elongation of the first or index-finger, in the abbreviation of
the thumb and middle finger, and in the reduction of the ring-finger.
These fingers, with sharp claws, were not strong enough for climbing,
and the only special fitness we have been able to imagine is that they
were used for the grasping of a light and agile prey (see figs. 17,
18.)

Another reason for the venture of designating this animal as the
"bird-catcher" is that the Jurassic birds (not thus far discovered in
America, but known from the Archæopteryx of Germany) were not so
active or such strong fliers as existing birds; in fact, they were not
unlike the little dinosaur itself. They were toothed, long-tailed,
short-armed, the body was feathered instead of scaled; they rose
slowly from the ground. This renders it probable that they were the
prey of the smaller pneumatic-built dinosaurs such as the present
animal.

This hypothetical bird-catcher seems to have been designed to spring
upon a delicately built prey, the structure being the very antipode of
that of the large carnivorous dinosaurs. A difficulty in the
bird-catching theory, namely, that the teeth are not as sharp as one
would expect to find them in a flesh-eater, is somewhat offset by the
similarity of the teeth to those of the bird-eating monitor lizards
(Varanus), which are not especially sharp.

The Great Yield of the Quarry. Our explorations in the quarry began
in the spring of 1898, and have continued ever since during favorable
weather. The total area explored at the close of the sixth year was
seven thousand two hundred and fifty square feet. Not one of the
twelve-foot squares into which the quarry was plotted lacked its
covering of bones, and in some cases the bones were two or three deep.
Each year we have expected to come to the end of this great deposit,
but it still yields a large return, although we have reason to believe
that we have exhausted the richest portions.

We have taken up four hundred and eighty-three parts of animals, some
of which may belong to the same individuals. These were packed in two
hundred and seventy-five boxes, representing a gross weight of nearly
one hundred thousand pounds. Reckoning from the number of thigh-bones,
we reach, as a rough estimate of the total, seventy-three animals of
the following kinds: giant herbivorous dinosaurs, 44; plated
herbivorous dinosaurs, or stegosaurs, 3; iguanodonts or smaller
herbivorous dinosaurs, 4; large carnivorous dinosaurs, 6; small
carnivorous dinosaurs, 3; crocodiles, 4; turtles, 5. But this
represents only a part of the whole deposit, which we know to be of
twice the extent already explored, and these figures do not include
the bones which were partly washed out and used in the construction
of the Bone-Cabin. The grand total would probably include parts of
over one hundred giant dinosaurs.

The Struggle for Existence Among the Dinosaurs. Never in the whole
history of the world as we now know it have there been such remarkable
land scenes as were presented when the reign of these titanic reptiles
was at its climax. It was also the prevailing life-picture of England,
Germany, South America, and India. We can imagine herds of these
creatures from fifty to eighty feet in length, with limbs and gait
analogous to those of gigantic elephants, but with bodies extending
through the long, flexible, and tapering necks into the diminutive
heads, and reaching back into the equally long and still more tapering
tails. The four or five varieties which existed together were each
fitted to some special mode of life; some living more exclusively on
land, others for longer periods in the water.

The competition for existence was not only with the great carnivorous
dinosaurs, but with other kinds of herbivorous dinosaurs (the
iguanodonts), which had much smaller bodies to sustain and a much
superior tooth mechanism for the taking of food.

The cutting off of this giant dinosaur dynasty was nearly if not quite
simultaneous the world over. The explanation which is deducible from
similar catastrophes to other large types of animals is that a very
large frame, with a limited and specialized set of teeth fitted only
to a certain special food, is a dangerous combination of characters.
Such a monster organism is no longer adaptable; any serious change of
conditions which would tend to eliminate the special food would also
eliminate these great animals as a necessary consequence.

  a. This region is the richest known collecting ground for
  cretacic dinosaurs.]

There is an entirely different class of explanations, however, to be
considered, which are consistent both with the continued fitness of
structure of the giant dinosaurs themselves and with the survival of
their especial food; such, for example, as the introduction of a new
enemy more deadly even than the great carnivorous dinosaurs. Among
such theories the most ingenious is that of the late Professor Cope,
who suggested that some of the small, inoffensive, and inconspicuous
forms of Jurassic mammals, of the size of the shrew and the hedgehog,
contracted the habit of seeking out the nests of these dinosaurs,
gnawing through the shells of their eggs, and thus destroying the
young. The appearance, or evolution, of any egg-destroying animals,
whether reptiles or mammals, which could attack this great race at
such a defenseless point would be rapidly followed by its extinction.
We must accordingly be on the alert for all possible theories of
extinction; and these theories themselves will fall under the
universal principle of the survival of the fittest until we
approximate or actually hit upon the truth.


FOSSIL HUNTING BY BOAT IN CANADA.

By Barnum Brown.

"How do you know where to look for fossils?" is a common question. In
general it may be answered that the surface of North America has been
pretty well explored by government surveys and scientific expeditions
and the geologic age of the larger areas determined. Most important in
determining the geologic sequence of the earth's strata are the fossil
remains of animal and plant life. A grouping of distinct species of
fossils correlated with stratigraphic characters in the rocks
determines these subdivisions. When a collection of fossils is desired
to represent a certain period, exploring parties are sent to these
known areas. Sometimes however, chance information leads up to most
important discoveries, such as resulted from the work of the past two
seasons in Alberta, Canada.

A visitor to the Museum, Mr. J.L. Wagner, while examining our mineral
collections saw the large bones in the Reptile Hall and remarked to
the Curator of Mineralogy that he had seen many similar bones near his
ranch in the Red Deer Cañon of Alberta. After talking some time an
invitation was extended to the writer to visit his home and prospect
the cañon. Accordingly in the fall of 1909 a preliminary trip was made
to the locality.

From Didsbury, a little town north of Calgary, the writer drove
eastward ninety miles to the Red Deer River through a portion of the
newly opened grain belt of Alberta, destined in the near future to
produce a large part of the world's bread. Near the railroad the land
is mostly under cultivation and comfortable homes and bountiful grain
fields testify to the rich nature of the soil. A few miles eastward
the brushland gives way to a level expanse of grass-covered prairie
dotted here and there by large and small lakes probably of glacial
origin. Mile after mile the road follows section lines and one is
rarely out of sight of the house of some "homesteader." It is through
this level farm land that the Red Deer River wends its way flowing
through a cañon far below the surface. Near Wagner's ranch the cañon
was prospected and so many bones found that it appeared most
desirable to do extended searching along the river.

Usually fossils are found in "bad lands," where extensive areas are
denuded of grass and the surface eroded into hills and ravines. A camp
is located near some spring or stream and collectors ride or walk over
miles of these exposures in each direction till the region is
thoroughly explored. Quite different are conditions on the Red Deer
River. Cutting through the prairie land the river had formed a cañon
two to five hundred feet deep and rarely more than a mile wide at the
top. In places the walls are nearly perpendicular and the river winds
in its narrow valley, touching one side then crossing to the other so
that it is impossible to follow up or down its course any great
distance even on horseback.

It was evident that the most feasible way to work these banks was from
a boat; consequently in the summer of 1910 our party proceeded to the
town of Red Deer, where the Calgary-Edmonton railroad crosses the
river. There a flatboat, twelve by thirty feet in dimension, was
constructed on lines similar to a western ferry boat, having a
carrying capacity of eight tons with a twenty-two foot oar at each end
to direct its course. The rapid current averaging about four miles per
hour precluded any thought of going up stream in a large boat, so it
was constructed on lines sufficiently generous to form a living boat
as well as to carry the season's collection of fossils.

Supplied with a season's provisions, lumber for boxes, and plaster for
encasing bones, we began our fossil cruise down a cañon which once
echoed songs of the Bois brulé, for this was at one time the fur
territory of the great Hudson Bay Company.

  er River. Fossils secured along the banks were packed and loaded
  aboard the large scow and floated down the river to the railway
  station.]

No more interesting or instructive journey has ever been taken by the
writer. High up on the plateau, buildings and haystacks proclaim a
well-settled country, but habitations are rarely seen from the river
and for miles we floated through picturesque solitude unbroken save by
the roar of the rapids.

Especially characteristic of this cañon are the slides where the
current setting against the bank has undermined it until a mountain of
earth slips into the river, in some cases almost choking its course.
A continual sorting thus goes on, the finer material being carried
away while the boulders are left as barriers forming slow moving
reaches of calm water and stretches of rapids difficult to navigate
during low water. In one of these slides we found several small mammal
jaws and teeth not known before from Canada, associated with fossil
clam shells of Eocene age.

The long midsummer days in latitude 52° gave many working hours, but
with frequent stops to prospect the banks we rarely floated more than
twenty miles per day. An occasional flock of ducks and geese were
disturbed as our boat approached and bank beaver houses were
frequently passed, but few of the animals were seen during the
daytime. Tying the boat to a tree at night we would go ashore to camp
among the trees where after dinner pipes were smoked in the glow of a
great camp fire. Only a fossil hunter or a desert traveler can fully
appreciate the luxury of abundant wood and running water. In the
stillness of the night the underworld was alive and many little feet
rustled the leaves where daylight disclosed no sound. Then the beaver
and muskrat swam up to investigate this new intruder, while from the
tree-tops came the constant query, "Who! Who!"

For seventy miles the country is thickly wooded with pine and poplar,
the stately spruce trees silhouetted against the sky adding a charm to
the ever changing scene. Nature has also been kind to the treeless
regions beyond, for underneath the fertile prairie, veins of good
lignite coal of varying thickness are successively cut by the river.
In many places these are worked in the river banks during winter. One
vein of excellent quality is eighteen feet thick, although usually
they are much thinner. The government right has been taken to mine
most of this coal outcropping along the river.

  on formation in Red Deer River. The skull is in the rock
  just above the pick, about the center of the photograph.]

Along the upper portion of the stream are banks of Eocene age, from
which shells and mammal jaws were secured, but near the town of
Content where the river bends southward, a new series of rocks
appeared and in these our search was rewarded by finding dinosaur
bones similar to those seen at Wagner's ranch. Specimens were found in
increasing numbers as we continued our journey, and progress down the
river was necessarily much slower. Frequently the boat would be tied
up a week or more at one camp while we searched the banks, examining
the cliffs layer by layer that no fossil might escape observation.
With the little dingey the opposite side of the river was reached so
that both sides were covered at the same time from one camp. As soon
as a mile or more had been prospected or a new specimen secured, the
boat was dropped down to a new convenient anchorage. Box after box was
added to the collection till scarcely a cubit's space remained
unoccupied on board our fossil ark.

Where prairie badlands are eroded in innumerable buttes and ravines it
is always doubtful if one has seen all exposures, so there was
peculiar satisfaction in making a thorough search of these river banks
knowing that few if any fossils had escaped observation. On account of
the heavy rainfall and frequent sliding of banks new fossils are
exposed every season so that in a few years these same banks can again
be explored profitably. This river will become as classic hunting
ground for reptile remains as the Badlands of South Dakota are for
mammals.

Although the summer days are long in this latitude the season is short
and thousands of geese flying southward foretell the early winter.
Where the temperature is not infrequently forty to sixty degrees below
zero in winter, it is difficult to think of a time when a warm
climate could have prevailed, yet such condition is indicated by the
fossil plants.

When the weather became too cold to work with plaster, the fossils
were shipped from a branch railroad forty-five miles distant, the camp
material was stored for the winter and with block and tackle the big
boat was hauled up on shore above the reach of high water.

In the summer of 1911 the boat was recalked and again launched when we
continued our search from the point at which work closed the previous
year. During the summer we were visited by the Museum's President,
Prof. Henry Fairfield Osborn, and one of the Trustees, Mr. Madison
Grant. A canoeing trip, one of great interest and pleasure, was taken
with our visitors covering two hundred and fifty miles down the river
from the town of Red Deer, during which valuable material was added to
the collection and important geological data secured.

As a result of the Canadian work the Museum is enriched by a
magnificent collection of Cretaceous fossils some of which are new to
science.


It must have been a little after three o'clock in the afternoon that it
happened--the afternoon of June 3rd, 1916.  It seems incredible that
all that I have passed through--all those weird and terrifying
experiences--should have been encompassed within so short a span as
three brief months.  Rather might I have experienced a cosmic cycle,
with all its changes and evolutions for that which I have seen with my
own eyes in this brief interval of time--things that no other mortal
eye had seen before, glimpses of a world past, a world dead, a world so
long dead that even in the lowest Cambrian stratum no trace of it
remains.  Fused with the melting inner crust, it has passed forever
beyond the ken of man other than in that lost pocket of the earth
whither fate has borne me and where my doom is sealed. I am here and
here must remain.


After reading this far, my interest, which already had been stimulated
by the finding of the manuscript, was approaching the boiling-point.  I
had come to Greenland for the summer, on the advice of my physician,
and was slowly being bored to extinction, as I had thoughtlessly
neglected to bring sufficient reading-matter. Being an indifferent
fisherman, my enthusiasm for this form of sport soon waned; yet in the
absence of other forms of recreation I was now risking my life in an
entirely inadequate boat off Cape Farewell at the southernmost
extremity of Greenland.

Greenland!  As a descriptive appellation, it is a sorry joke--but my
story has nothing to do with Greenland, nothing to do with me; so I
shall get through with the one and the other as rapidly as possible.

The inadequate boat finally arrived at a precarious landing, the
natives, waist-deep in the surf, assisting.  I was carried ashore, and
while the evening meal was being prepared, I wandered to and fro along
the rocky, shattered shore.  Bits of surf-harried beach clove the worn
granite, or whatever the rocks of Cape Farewell may be composed of, and
as I followed the ebbing tide down one of these soft stretches, I saw
the thing.  Were one to bump into a Bengal tiger in the ravine behind
the Bimini Baths, one could be no more surprised than was I to see a
perfectly good quart thermos bottle turning and twisting in the surf of
Cape Farewell at the southern extremity of Greenland. I rescued it, but
I was soaked above the knees doing it; and then I sat down in the sand
and opened it, and in the long twilight read the manuscript, neatly
written and tightly folded, which was its contents.

You have read the opening paragraph, and if you are an imaginative
idiot like myself, you will want to read the rest of it; so I shall
give it to you here, omitting quotation marks--which are difficult of
remembrance.  In two minutes you will forget me.


My home is in Santa Monica.  I am, or was, junior member of my father's
firm.  We are ship-builders.  Of recent years we have specialized on
submarines, which we have built for Germany, England, France and the
United States.  I know a sub as a mother knows her baby's face, and
have commanded a score of them on their trial runs.  Yet my
inclinations were all toward aviation. I graduated under Curtiss, and
after a long siege with my father obtained his permission to try for
the Lafayette Escadrille.  As a stepping-stone I obtained an
appointment in the American ambulance service and was on my way to
France when three shrill whistles altered, in as many seconds, my
entire scheme of life.

I was sitting on deck with some of the fellows who were going into the
American ambulance service with me, my Airedale, Crown Prince Nobbler,
asleep at my feet, when the first blast of the whistle shattered the
peace and security of the ship.  Ever since entering the U-boat zone we
had been on the lookout for periscopes, and children that we were,
bemoaning the unkind fate that was to see us safely into France on the
morrow without a glimpse of the dread marauders.  We were young; we
craved thrills, and God knows we got them that day; yet by comparison
with that through which I have since passed they were as tame as a
Punch-and-Judy show.

I shall never forget the ashy faces of the passengers as they stampeded
for their life-belts, though there was no panic. Nobs rose with a low
growl.  I rose, also, and over the ship's side, I saw not two hundred
yards distant the periscope of a submarine, while racing toward the
liner the wake of a torpedo was distinctly visible.  We were aboard an
American ship--which, of course, was not armed.  We were entirely
defenseless; yet without warning, we were being torpedoed.

I stood rigid, spellbound, watching the white wake of the torpedo. It
struck us on the starboard side almost amidships.  The vessel rocked as
though the sea beneath it had been uptorn by a mighty volcano. We were
thrown to the decks, bruised and stunned, and then above the ship,
carrying with it fragments of steel and wood and dismembered human
bodies, rose a column of water hundreds of feet into the air.

The silence which followed the detonation of the exploding torpedo was
almost equally horrifying.  It lasted for perhaps two seconds, to be
followed by the screams and moans of the wounded, the cursing of the
men and the hoarse commands of the ship's officers.  They were
splendid--they and their crew.  Never before had I been so proud of my
nationality as I was that moment.  In all the chaos which followed the
torpedoing of the liner no officer or member of the crew lost his head
or showed in the slightest any degree of panic or fear.

While we were attempting to lower boats, the submarine emerged and
trained guns on us.  The officer in command ordered us to lower our
flag, but this the captain of the liner refused to do. The ship was
listing frightfully to starboard, rendering the port boats useless,
while half the starboard boats had been demolished by the explosion.
Even while the passengers were crowding the starboard rail and
scrambling into the few boats left to us, the submarine commenced
shelling the ship.  I saw one shell burst in a group of women and
children, and then I turned my head and covered my eyes.

When I looked again to horror was added chagrin, for with the emerging
of the U-boat I had recognized her as a product of our own shipyard.  I
knew her to a rivet.  I had superintended her construction.  I had sat
in that very conning-tower and directed the efforts of the sweating
crew below when first her prow clove the sunny summer waters of the
Pacific; and now this creature of my brain and hand had turned
Frankenstein, bent upon pursuing me to my death.

A second shell exploded upon the deck.  One of the lifeboats,
frightfully overcrowded, swung at a dangerous angle from its davits. A
fragment of the shell shattered the bow tackle, and I saw the women and
children and the men vomited into the sea beneath, while the boat
dangled stern up for a moment from its single davit, and at last with
increasing momentum dived into the midst of the struggling victims
screaming upon the face of the waters.

Now I saw men spring to the rail and leap into the ocean.  The deck was
tilting to an impossible angle.  Nobs braced himself with all four feet
to keep from slipping into the scuppers and looked up into my face with
a questioning whine.  I stooped and stroked his head.

"Come on, boy!" I cried, and running to the side of the ship, dived
headforemost over the rail.  When I came up, the first thing I saw was
Nobs swimming about in a bewildered sort of way a few yards from me.
At sight of me his ears went flat, and his lips parted in a
characteristic grin.

The submarine was withdrawing toward the north, but all the time it was
shelling the open boats, three of them, loaded to the gunwales with
survivors.  Fortunately the small boats presented a rather poor target,
which, combined with the bad marksmanship of the Germans preserved
their occupants from harm; and after a few minutes a blotch of smoke
appeared upon the eastern horizon and the U-boat submerged and
disappeared.

All the time the lifeboats had been pulling away from the danger of the
sinking liner, and now, though I yelled at the top of my lungs, they
either did not hear my appeals for help or else did not dare return to
succor me.  Nobs and I had gained some little distance from the ship
when it rolled completely over and sank. We were caught in the suction
only enough to be drawn backward a few yards, neither of us being
carried beneath the surface. I glanced hurriedly about for something to
which to cling. My eyes were directed toward the point at which the
liner had disappeared when there came from the depths of the ocean the
muffled reverberation of an explosion, and almost simultaneously a
geyser of water in which were shattered lifeboats, human bodies, steam,
coal, oil, and the flotsam of a liner's deck leaped high above the
surface of the sea--a watery column momentarily marking the grave of
another ship in this greatest cemetery of the seas.

When the turbulent waters had somewhat subsided and the sea had ceased
to spew up wreckage, I ventured to swim back in search of something
substantial enough to support my weight and that of Nobs as well.  I
had gotten well over the area of the wreck when not a half-dozen yards
ahead of me a lifeboat shot bow foremost out of the ocean almost its
entire length to flop down upon its keel with a mighty splash.  It must
have been carried far below, held to its mother ship by a single rope
which finally parted to the enormous strain put upon it.  In no other
way can I account for its having leaped so far out of the water--a
beneficent circumstance to which I doubtless owe my life, and that of
another far dearer to me than my own.  I say beneficent circumstance
even in the face of the fact that a fate far more hideous confronts us
than that which we escaped that day; for because of that circumstance I
have met her whom otherwise I never should have known; I have met and
loved her.  At least I have had that great happiness in life; nor can
Caspak, with all her horrors, expunge that which has been.

So for the thousandth time I thank the strange fate which sent that
lifeboat hurtling upward from the green pit of destruction to which it
had been dragged--sent it far up above the surface, emptying its water
as it rose above the waves, and dropping it upon the surface of the
sea, buoyant and safe.

It did not take me long to clamber over its side and drag Nobs in to
comparative safety, and then I glanced around upon the scene of death
and desolation which surrounded us.  The sea was littered with wreckage
among which floated the pitiful forms of women and children, buoyed up
by their useless lifebelts. Some were torn and mangled; others lay
rolling quietly to the motion of the sea, their countenances composed
and peaceful; others were set in hideous lines of agony or horror.
Close to the boat's side floated the figure of a girl.  Her face was
turned upward, held above the surface by her life-belt, and was framed
in a floating mass of dark and waving hair.  She was very beautiful.  I
had never looked upon such perfect features, such a divine molding
which was at the same time human--intensely human.  It was a face
filled with character and strength and femininity--the face of one who
was created to love and to be loved.  The cheeks were flushed to the
hue of life and health and vitality, and yet she lay there upon the
bosom of the sea, dead.  I felt something rise in my throat as I looked
down upon that radiant vision, and I swore that I should live to avenge
her murder.

And then I let my eyes drop once more to the face upon the water, and
what I saw nearly tumbled me backward into the sea, for the eyes in the
dead face had opened; the lips had parted; and one hand was raised
toward me in a mute appeal for succor.  She lived! She was not dead! I
leaned over the boat's side and drew her quickly in to the comparative
safety which God had given me.  I removed her life-belt and my soggy
coat and made a pillow for her head.  I chafed her hands and arms and
feet.  I worked over her for an hour, and at last I was rewarded by a
deep sigh, and again those great eyes opened and looked into mine.

At that I was all embarrassment.  I have never been a ladies' man; at
Leland-Stanford I was the butt of the class because of my hopeless
imbecility in the presence of a pretty girl; but the men liked me,
nevertheless.  I was rubbing one of her hands when she opened her eyes,
and I dropped it as though it were a red-hot rivet. Those eyes took me
in slowly from head to foot; then they wandered slowly around the
horizon marked by the rising and falling gunwales of the lifeboat.
They looked at Nobs and softened, and then came back to me filled with
questioning.

"I--I--" I stammered, moving away and stumbling over the next thwart.
The vision smiled wanly.

"Aye-aye, sir!" she replied faintly, and again her lips drooped, and
her long lashes swept the firm, fair texture of her skin.

"I hope that you are feeling better," I finally managed to say.

"Do you know," she said after a moment of silence, "I have been awake
for a long time!  But I did not dare open my eyes. I thought I must be
dead, and I was afraid to look, for fear that I should see nothing but
blackness about me.  I am afraid to die!  Tell me what happened after
the ship went down. I remember all that happened before--oh, but I wish
that I might forget it!"  A sob broke her voice.  "The beasts!" she
went on after a moment.  "And to think that I was to have married one
of them--a lieutenant in the German navy."

Presently she resumed as though she had not ceased speaking. "I went
down and down and down.  I thought I should never cease to sink.  I
felt no particular distress until I suddenly started upward at
ever-increasing velocity; then my lungs seemed about to burst, and I
must have lost consciousness, for I remember nothing more until I
opened my eyes after listening to a torrent of invective against
Germany and Germans.  Tell me, please, all that happened after the ship
sank."

I told her, then, as well as I could, all that I had seen--the
submarine shelling the open boats and all the rest of it. She thought
it marvelous that we should have been spared in so providential a
manner, and I had a pretty speech upon my tongue's end, but lacked the
nerve to deliver it.  Nobs had come over and nosed his muzzle into her
lap, and she stroked his ugly face, and at last she leaned over and put
her cheek against his forehead. I have always admired Nobs; but this
was the first time that it had ever occurred to me that I might wish to
be Nobs.  I wondered how he would take it, for he is as unused to women
as I.  But he took to it as a duck takes to water.  What I lack of
being a ladies' man, Nobs certainly makes up for as a ladies' dog. The
old scalawag just closed his eyes and put on one of the softest
"sugar-wouldn't-melt-in-my-mouth" expressions you ever saw and stood
there taking it and asking for more.  It made me jealous.

"You seem fond of dogs," I said.

"I am fond of this dog," she replied.

Whether she meant anything personal in that reply I did not know; but I
took it as personal and it made me feel mighty good.

As we drifted about upon that vast expanse of loneliness it is not
strange that we should quickly become well acquainted. Constantly we
scanned the horizon for signs of smoke, venturing guesses as to our
chances of rescue; but darkness settled, and the black night enveloped
us without ever the sight of a speck upon the waters.

We were thirsty, hungry, uncomfortable, and cold.  Our wet garments had
dried but little and I knew that the girl must be in grave danger from
the exposure to a night of cold and wet upon the water in an open boat,
without sufficient clothing and no food.  I had managed to bail all the
water out of the boat with cupped hands, ending by mopping the balance
up with my handkerchief--a slow and back-breaking procedure; thus I had
made a comparatively dry place for the girl to lie down low in the
bottom of the boat, where the sides would protect her from the night
wind, and when at last she did so, almost overcome as she was by
weakness and fatigue, I threw my wet coat over her further to thwart
the chill.  But it was of no avail; as I sat watching her, the
moonlight marking out the graceful curves of her slender young body, I
saw her shiver.

"Isn't there something I can do?" I asked.  "You can't lie there
chilled through all night.  Can't you suggest something?"

She shook her head.  "We must grin and bear it," she replied after a
moment.

Nobbler came and lay down on the thwart beside me, his back against my
leg, and I sat staring in dumb misery at the girl, knowing in my heart
of hearts that she might die before morning came, for what with the
shock and exposure, she had already gone through enough to kill almost
any woman. And as I gazed down at her, so small and delicate and
helpless, there was born slowly within my breast a new emotion.  It had
never been there before; now it will never cease to be there.  It made
me almost frantic in my desire to find some way to keep warm the
cooling lifeblood in her veins.  I was cold myself, though I had almost
forgotten it until Nobbler moved and I felt a new sensation of cold
along my leg against which he had lain, and suddenly realized that in
that one spot I had been warm.  Like a great light came the
understanding of a means to warm the girl.  Immediately I knelt beside
her to put my scheme into practice when suddenly I was overwhelmed with
embarrassment.  Would she permit it, even if I could muster the courage
to suggest it?  Then I saw her frame convulse, shudderingly, her
muscles reacting to her rapidly lowering temperature, and casting
prudery to the winds, I threw myself down beside her and took her in my
arms, pressing her body close to mine.

She drew away suddenly, voicing a little cry of fright, and tried to
push me from her.

"Forgive me," I managed to stammer.  "It is the only way. You will die
of exposure if you are not warmed, and Nobs and I are the only means we
can command for furnishing warmth." And I held her tightly while I
called Nobs and bade him lie down at her back.  The girl didn't
struggle any more when she learned my purpose; but she gave two or
three little gasps, and then began to cry softly, burying her face on
my arm, and thus she fell asleep.



Chapter 2

Toward morning,  I must have dozed, though it seemed to me at the time
that I had lain awake for days, instead of hours.  When I finally
opened my eyes, it was daylight, and the girl's hair was in my face,
and she was breathing normally.  I thanked God for that.  She had
turned her head during the night so that as I opened my eyes I saw her
face not an inch from mine, my lips almost touching hers.

It was Nobs who finally awoke her.  He got up, stretched, turned around
a few times and lay down again, and the girl opened her eyes and looked
into mine.  Hers went very wide at first, and then slowly comprehension
came to her, and she smiled.

"You have been very good to me," she said, as I helped her to rise,
though if the truth were known I was more in need of assistance than
she; the circulation all along my left side seeming to be paralyzed
entirely.  "You have been very good to me." And that was the only
mention she ever made of it; yet I know that she was thankful and that
only reserve prevented her from referring to what, to say the least,
was an embarrassing situation, however unavoidable.

Shortly after daylight we saw smoke apparently coming straight toward
us, and after a time we made out the squat lines of a tug--one of those
fearless exponents of England's supremacy of the sea that tows sailing
ships into French and English ports. I stood up on a thwart and waved
my soggy coat above my head. Nobs stood upon another and barked.  The
girl sat at my feet straining her eyes toward the deck of the oncoming
boat. "They see us," she said at last.  "There is a man answering your
signal." She was right.  A lump came into my throat--for her sake
rather than for mine.  She was saved, and none too soon. She could not
have lived through another night upon the Channel; she might not have
lived through the coming day.

The tug came close beside us, and a man on deck threw us a rope.
Willing hands dragged us to the deck, Nobs scrambling nimbly aboard
without assistance.  The rough men were gentle as mothers with the
girl.  Plying us both with questions they hustled her to the captain's
cabin and me to the boiler-room.  They told the girl to take off her
wet clothes and throw them outside the door that they might be dried,
and then to slip into the captain's bunk and get warm.  They didn't
have to tell me to strip after I once got into the warmth of the
boiler-room.  In a jiffy, my clothes hung about where they might dry
most quickly, and I myself was absorbing, through every pore, the
welcome heat of the stifling compartment.  They brought us hot soup and
coffee, and then those who were not on duty sat around and helped me
damn the Kaiser and his brood.

As soon as our clothes were dry, they bade us don them, as the chances
were always more than fair in those waters that we should run into
trouble with the enemy, as I was only too well aware. What with the
warmth and the feeling of safety for the girl, and the knowledge that a
little rest and food would quickly overcome the effects of her
experiences of the past dismal hours, I was feeling more content than I
had experienced since those three whistle-blasts had shattered the
peace of my world the previous afternoon.

But peace upon the Channel has been but a transitory thing since
August, 1914.  It proved itself such that morning, for I had scarce
gotten into my dry clothes and taken the girl's apparel to the
captain's cabin when an order was shouted down into the engine-room for
full speed ahead, and an instant later I heard the dull boom of a gun.
In a moment I was up on deck to see an enemy submarine about two
hundred yards off our port bow.  She had signaled us to stop, and our
skipper had ignored the order; but now she had her gun trained on us,
and the second shot grazed the cabin, warning the belligerent
tug-captain that it was time to obey.  Once again an order went down to
the engine-room, and the tug reduced speed.  The U-boat ceased firing
and ordered the tug to come about and approach.  Our momentum had
carried us a little beyond the enemy craft, but we were turning now on
the arc of a circle that would bring us alongside her.  As I stood
watching the maneuver and wondering what was to become of us, I felt
something touch my elbow and turned to see the girl standing at my
side.  She looked up into my face with a rueful expression. "They seem
bent on our destruction," she said, "and it looks like the same boat
that sunk us yesterday."

"It is," I replied.  "I know her well.  I helped design her and took
her out on her first run."

The girl drew back from me with a little exclamation of surprise and
disappointment.  "I thought you were an American," she said. "I had no
idea you were a--a--"

"Nor am I," I replied.  "Americans have been building submarines for
all nations for many years.  I wish, though, that we had gone bankrupt,
my father and I, before ever we turned out that Frankenstein of a
thing."

We were approaching the U-boat at half speed now, and I could almost
distinguish the features of the men upon her deck. A sailor stepped to
my side and slipped something hard and cold into my hand.  I did not
have to look at it to know that it was a heavy pistol.  "Tyke 'er an'
use 'er," was all he said.

Our bow was pointed straight toward the U-boat now as I heard word
passed to the engine for full speed ahead.  I instantly grasped the
brazen effrontery of the plucky English skipper--he was going to ram
five hundreds tons of U-boat in the face of her trained gun.  I could
scarce repress a cheer.  At first the boches didn't seem to grasp his
intention.  Evidently they thought they were witnessing an exhibition
of poor seamanship, and they yelled their warnings to the tug to reduce
speed and throw the helm hard to port.

We were within fifty feet of them when they awakened to the intentional
menace of our maneuver.  Their gun crew was off its guard; but they
sprang to their piece now and sent a futile shell above our heads.
Nobs leaped about and barked furiously.  "Let 'em have it!" commanded
the tug-captain, and instantly revolvers and rifles poured bullets upon
the deck of the submersible.  Two of the gun-crew went down; the other
trained their piece at the water-line of the oncoming tug.  The balance
of those on deck replied to our small-arms fire, directing their
efforts toward the man at our wheel.

I hastily pushed the girl down the companionway leading to the
engine-room, and then I raised my pistol and fired my first shot at a
boche.  What happened in the next few seconds happened so quickly that
details are rather blurred in my memory.  I saw the helmsman lunge
forward upon the wheel, pulling the helm around so that the tug sheered
off quickly from her course, and I recall realizing that all our
efforts were to be in vain, because of all the men aboard, Fate had
decreed that this one should fall first to an enemy bullet.  I saw the
depleted gun-crew on the submarine fire their piece and I felt the
shock of impact and heard the loud explosion as the shell struck and
exploded in our bows.

I saw and realized these things even as I was leaping into the
pilot-house and grasping the wheel, standing astride the dead body of
the helmsman.  With all my strength I threw the helm to starboard; but
it was too late to effect the purpose of our skipper.  The best I did
was to scrape alongside the sub. I heard someone shriek an order into
the engine-room; the boat shuddered and trembled to the sudden
reversing of the engines, and our speed quickly lessened.  Then I saw
what that madman of a skipper planned since his first scheme had gone
wrong.

With a loud-yelled command, he leaped to the slippery deck of the
submersible, and at his heels came his hardy crew.  I sprang from the
pilot-house and followed, not to be left out in the cold when it came
to strafing the boches.  From the engine room companionway came the
engineer and stockers, and together we leaped after the balance of the
crew and into the hand-to-hand fight that was covering the wet deck
with red blood.  Beside me came Nobs, silent now, and grim.  Germans
were emerging from the open hatch to take part in the battle on deck.
At first the pistols cracked amidst the cursing of the men and the loud
commands of the commander and his junior; but presently we were too
indiscriminately mixed to make it safe to use our firearms, and the
battle resolved itself into a hand-to-hand struggle for possession of
the deck.

The sole aim of each of us was to hurl one of the opposing force into
the sea.  I shall never forget the hideous expression upon the face of
the great Prussian with whom chance confronted me. He lowered his head
and rushed at me, bellowing like a bull. With a quick side-step and
ducking low beneath his outstretched arms, I eluded him; and as he
turned to come back at me, I landed a blow upon his chin which sent him
spinning toward the edge of the deck.  I saw his wild endeavors to
regain his equilibrium; I saw him reel drunkenly for an instant upon
the brink of eternity and then, with a loud scream, slip into the sea.
At the same instant a pair of giant arms encircled me from behind and
lifted me entirely off my feet.  Kick and squirm as I would, I could
neither turn toward my antagonist nor free myself from his maniacal
grasp.  Relentlessly he was rushing me toward the side of the vessel
and death.  There was none to stay him, for each of my companions was
more than occupied by from one to three of the enemy.  For an instant I
was fearful for myself, and then I saw that which filled me with a far
greater terror for another.

My boche was bearing me toward the side of the submarine against which
the tug was still pounding.  That I should be ground to death between
the two was lost upon me as I saw the girl standing alone upon the
tug's deck, as I saw the stern high in air and the bow rapidly settling
for the final dive, as I saw death from which I could not save her
clutching at the skirts of the woman I now knew all too well that I
loved.

I had perhaps the fraction of a second longer to live when I heard an
angry growl behind us mingle with a cry of pain and rage from the giant
who carried me.  Instantly he went backward to the deck, and as he did
so he threw his arms outwards to save himself, freeing me.  I fell
heavily upon him, but was upon my feet in the instant.  As I arose, I
cast a single glance at my opponent. Never again would he menace me or
another, for Nob's great jaws had closed upon his throat.  Then I
sprang toward the edge of the deck closest to the girl upon the sinking
tug.

"Jump!" I cried.  "Jump!"  And I held out my arms to her. Instantly as
though with implicit confidence in my ability to save her, she leaped
over the side of the tug onto the sloping, slippery side of the U-boat.
I reached far over to seize her hand.  At the same instant the tug
pointed its stern straight toward the sky and plunged out of sight.  My
hand missed the girl's by a fraction of an inch, and I saw her slip
into the sea; but scarce had she touched the water when I was in after
her.

The sinking tug drew us far below the surface; but I had seized her the
moment I struck the water, and so we went down together, and together
we came up--a few yards from the U-boat.  The first thing I heard was
Nobs barking furiously; evidently he had missed me and was searching.
A single glance at the vessel's deck assured me that the battle was
over and that we had been victorious, for I saw our survivors holding a
handful of the enemy at pistol points while one by one the rest of the
crew was coming out of the craft's interior and lining up on deck with
the other prisoners.

As I swam toward the submarine with the girl, Nobs' persistent barking
attracted the attention of some of the tug's crew, so that as soon as
we reached the side there were hands to help us aboard.  I asked the
girl if she was hurt, but she assured me that she was none the worse
for this second wetting; nor did she seem to suffer any from shock.  I
was to learn for myself that this slender and seemingly delicate
creature possessed the heart and courage of a warrior.

As we joined our own party, I found the tug's mate checking up our
survivors.  There were ten of us left, not including the girl. Our
brave skipper was missing, as were eight others.  There had been
nineteen of us in the attacking party and we had accounted in one way
and another during the battle for sixteen Germans and had taken nine
prisoners, including the commander.  His lieutenant had been killed.

"Not a bad day's work," said Bradley, the mate, when he had completed
his roll.  "Only losing the skipper," he added, "was the worst.  He was
a fine man, a fine man."

Olson--who in spite of his name was Irish, and in spite of his not
being Scotch had been the tug's engineer--was standing with Bradley and
me.  "Yis," he agreed, "it's a day's wor-rk we're after doin', but what
are we goin' to be doin' wid it now we got it?"

"We'll run her into the nearest English port," said Bradley, "and then
we'll all go ashore and get our V. C.'s," he concluded, laughing.

"How you goin' to run her?" queried Olson.  "You can't trust these
Dutchmen."

Bradley scratched his head.  "I guess you're right," he admitted. "And
I don't know the first thing about a sub."

"I do," I assured him.  "I know more about this particular sub than the
officer who commanded her."

Both men looked at me in astonishment, and then I had to explain all
over again as I had explained to the girl.  Bradley and Olson were
delighted.  Immediately I was put in command, and the first thing I did
was to go below with Olson and inspect the craft thoroughly for hidden
boches and damaged machinery.  There were no Germans below, and
everything was intact and in ship-shape working order.  I then ordered
all hands below except one man who was to act as lookout.  Questioning
the Germans, I found that all except the commander were willing to
resume their posts and aid in bringing the vessel into an English port.
I believe that they were relieved at the prospect of being detained at
a comfortable English prison-camp for the duration of the war after the
perils and privations through which they had passed.  The officer,
however, assured me that he would never be a party to the capture of
his vessel.

There was, therefore, nothing to do but put the man in irons. As we
were preparing to put this decision into force, the girl descended from
the deck.  It was the first time that she or the German officer had
seen each other's faces since we had boarded the U-boat.  I was
assisting the girl down the ladder and still retained a hold upon her
arm--possibly after such support was no longer necessary--when she
turned and looked squarely into the face of the German.  Each voiced a
sudden exclamation of surprise and dismay.

"Lys!" he cried, and took a step toward her.

The girl's eyes went wide, and slowly filled with a great horror, as
she shrank back.  Then her slender figure stiffened to the erectness of
a soldier, and with chin in air and without a word she turned her back
upon the officer.

"Take him away," I directed the two men who guarded him, "and put him
in irons."

When he had gone, the girl raised her eyes to mine.  "He is the German
of whom I spoke," she said.  "He is Baron von Schoenvorts."

I merely inclined my head.  She had loved him!  I wondered if in her
heart of hearts she did not love him yet.  Immediately I became
insanely jealous.  I hated Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts with such
utter intensity that the emotion thrilled me with a species of
exaltation.

But I didn't have much chance to enjoy my hatred then, for almost
immediately the lookout poked his face over the hatchway and bawled
down that there was smoke on the horizon, dead ahead. Immediately I
went on deck to investigate, and Bradley came with me.

"If she's friendly," he said, "we'll speak her.  If she's not, we'll
sink her--eh, captain?"

"Yes, lieutenant," I replied, and it was his turn to smile.

We hoisted the Union Jack and remained on deck, asking Bradley to go
below and assign to each member of the crew his duty, placing one
Englishman with a pistol beside each German.

"Half speed ahead," I commanded.

More rapidly now we closed the distance between ourselves and the
stranger, until I could plainly see the red ensign of the British
merchant marine.  My heart swelled with pride at the thought that
presently admiring British tars would be congratulating us upon our
notable capture; and just about then the merchant steamer must have
sighted us, for she veered suddenly toward the north, and a moment
later dense volumes of smoke issued from her funnels. Then, steering a
zigzag course, she fled from us as though we had been the bubonic
plague.  I altered the course of the submarine and set off in chase;
but the steamer was faster than we, and soon left us hopelessly astern.

With a rueful smile, I directed that our original course be resumed,
and once again we set off toward merry England. That was three months
ago, and we haven't arrived yet; nor is there any likelihood that we
ever shall.

The steamer we had just sighted must have wirelessed a warning, for it
wasn't half an hour before we saw more smoke on the horizon, and this
time the vessel flew the white ensign of the Royal Navy and carried
guns.  She didn't veer to the north or anywhere else, but bore down on
us rapidly.  I was just preparing to signal her, when a flame flashed
from her bows, and an instant later the water in front of us was thrown
high by the explosion of a shell.

Bradley had come on deck and was standing beside me.  "About one more
of those, and she'll have our range," he said.  "She doesn't seem to
take much stock in our Union Jack."

A second shell passed over us, and then I gave the command to change
our direction, at the same time directing Bradley to go below and give
the order to submerge.  I passed Nobs down to him, and following, saw
to the closing and fastening of the hatch.

It seemed to me that the diving-tanks never had filled so slowly. We
heard a loud explosion apparently directly above us; the craft trembled
to the shock which threw us all to the deck.  I expected momentarily to
feel the deluge of inrushing water, but none came. Instead we continued
to submerge until the manometer registered forty feet and then I knew
that we were safe.  Safe!  I almost smiled. I had relieved Olson, who
had remained in the tower at my direction, having been a member of one
of the early British submarine crews, and therefore having some
knowledge of the business.  Bradley was at my side.  He looked at me
quizzically.

"What the devil are we to do?" he asked.  "The merchantman will flee
us; the war-vessel will destroy us; neither will believe our colors or
give us a chance to explain.  We will meet even a worse reception if we
go nosing around a British port--mines, nets and all of it.  We can't
do it."

"Let's try it again when this fellow has lost the scent," I urged.
"There must come a ship that will believe us."

And try it again we did, only to be almost rammed by a huge freighter.
Later we were fired upon by a destroyer, and two merchantmen turned and
fled at our approach.  For two days we cruised up and down the Channel
trying to tell some one, who would listen, that we were friends; but no
one would listen.  After our encounter with the first warship I had
given instructions that a wireless message be sent out explaining our
predicament; but to my chagrin I discovered that both sending and
receiving instruments had disappeared.

"There is only one place you can go," von Schoenvorts sent word to me,
"and that is Kiel.  You can't land anywhere else in these waters.  If
you wish, I will take you there, and I can promise that you will be
treated well."

"There is another place we can go," I sent back my reply, "and we will
before we'll go to Germany.  That place is hell."



Chapter 3

Those were anxious days, during which I had but little opportunity to
associate with Lys.  I had given her the commander's room, Bradley and
I taking that of the deck-officer, while Olson and two of our best men
occupied the room ordinarily allotted to petty officers.  I made Nobs'
bed down in Lys' room, for I knew she would feel less alone.

Nothing of much moment occurred for a while after we left British
waters behind us.  We ran steadily along upon the surface, making good
time.  The first two boats we sighted made off as fast as they could
go; and the third, a huge freighter, fired on us, forcing us to
submerge.  It was after this that our troubles commenced. One of the
Diesel engines broke down in the morning, and while we were working on
it, the forward port diving-tank commenced to fill.  I was on deck at
the time and noted the gradual list. Guessing at once what was
happening, I leaped for the hatch and slamming it closed above my head,
dropped to the centrale.  By this time the craft was going down by the
head with a most unpleasant list to port, and I didn't wait to transmit
orders to some one else but ran as fast as I could for the valve that
let the sea into the forward port diving-tank.  It was wide open.  To
close it and to have the pump started that would empty it were the work
of but a minute; but we had had a close call.

I knew that the valve had never opened itself.  Some one had opened
it--some one who was willing to die himself if he might at the same
time encompass the death of all of us.

After that I kept a guard pacing the length of the narrow craft. We
worked upon the engine all that day and night and half the following
day.  Most of the time we drifted idly upon the surface, but toward
noon we sighted smoke due west, and having found that only enemies
inhabited the world for us, I ordered that the other engine be started
so that we could move out of the path of the oncoming steamer.  The
moment the engine started to turn, however, there was a grinding sound
of tortured steel, and when it had been stopped, we found that some one
had placed a cold-chisel in one of the gears.

It was another two days before we were ready to limp along, half
repaired.  The night before the repairs were completed, the sentry came
to my room and awoke me.  He was rather an intelligent fellow of the
English middle class, in whom I had much confidence.

"Well, Wilson," I asked.  "What's the matter now?"

He raised his finger to his lips and came closer to me.  "I think I've
found out who's doin' the mischief," he whispered, and nodded his head
toward the girl's room.  "I seen her sneakin' from the crew's room just
now," he went on.  "She'd been in gassin' wit' the boche commander.
Benson seen her in there las' night, too, but he never said nothin'
till I goes on watch tonight. Benson's sorter slow in the head, an' he
never puts two an' two together till some one else has made four out of
it."

If the man had come in and struck me suddenly in the face, I could have
been no more surprised.

"Say nothing of this to anyone," I ordered.  "Keep your eyes and ears
open and report every suspicious thing you see or hear."

The man saluted and left me; but for an hour or more I tossed,
restless, upon my hard bunk in an agony of jealousy and fear. Finally I
fell into a troubled sleep.  It was daylight when I awoke. We were
steaming along slowly upon the surface, my orders having been to
proceed at half speed until we could take an observation and determine
our position.  The sky had been overcast all the previous day and all
night; but as I stepped into the centrale that morning I was delighted
to see that the sun was again shining. The spirits of the men seemed
improved; everything seemed propitious. I forgot at once the cruel
misgivings of the past night as I set to work to take my observations.

What a blow awaited me!  The and chronometer had both been
broken beyond repair,  and they had been broken just this very night.
They had been broken upon the night that Lys had been seen talking with
von Schoenvorts.  I think that it was this last thought which hurt me
the worst.  I could look the other disaster in the face with
equanimity; but the bald fact that Lys might be a traitor appalled me.

I called Bradley and Olson on deck and told them what had happened, but
for the life of me I couldn't bring myself to repeat what Wilson had
reported to me the previous night. In fact, as I had given the matter
thought, it seemed incredible that the girl could have passed through
my room, in which Bradley and I slept, and then carried on a
conversation in the crew's room, in which Von Schoenvorts was kept,
without having been seen by more than a single man.

Bradley shook his head.  "I can't make it out," he said.  "One of those
boches must be pretty clever to come it over us all like this; but they
haven't harmed us as much as they think; there are still the extra
instruments."

It was my turn now to shake a doleful head.  "There are no extra
instruments," I told them.  "They too have disappeared as did the
wireless apparatus."

Both men looked at me in amazement.  "We still have the compass and the
sun," said Olson.  "They may be after getting the compass some night;
but they's too many of us around in the daytime fer 'em to get the sun."

It was then that one of the men stuck his head up through the hatchway
and seeing me, asked permission to come on deck and get a breath of
fresh air.  I recognized him as Benson, the man who, Wilson had said,
reported having seen Lys with von Schoenvorts two nights before.  I
motioned him on deck and then called him to one side, asking if he had
seen anything out of the way or unusual during his trick on watch the
night before.  The fellow scratched his head a moment and said, "No,"
and then as though it was an afterthought, he told me that he had seen
the girl in the crew's room about midnight talking with the German
commander, but as there hadn't seemed to him to be any harm in that, he
hadn't said anything about it.  Telling him never to fail to report to
me anything in the slightest out of the ordinary routine of the ship, I
dismissed him.

Several of the other men now asked permission to come on deck, and soon
all but those actually engaged in some necessary duty were standing
around smoking and talking, all in the best of spirits. I took
advantage of the absence of the men upon the deck to go below for my
breakfast, which the cook was already preparing upon the electric
stove.  Lys, followed by Nobs, appeared as I entered the centrale.  She
met me with a pleasant "Good morning!" which I am afraid I replied to
in a tone that was rather constrained and surly.

"Will you breakfast with me?" I suddenly asked the girl, determined to
commence a probe of my own along the lines which duty demanded.

She nodded a sweet acceptance of my invitation, and together we sat
down at the little table of the officers' mess.

"You slept well last night?" I asked.

"All night," she replied.  "I am a splendid sleeper."

Her manner was so straightforward and honest that I could not bring
myself to believe in her duplicity; yet--Thinking to surprise her into
a betrayal of her guilt, I blurted out:  "The chronometer and
were both destroyed last night; there is a traitor among us."  But she
never turned a hair by way of evidencing guilty knowledge of the
catastrophe.

"Who could it have been?" she cried.  "The Germans would be crazy to do
it, for their lives are as much at stake as ours."

"Men are often glad to die for an ideal--an ideal of patriotism,
perhaps," I replied; "and a willingness to martyr themselves includes a
willingness to sacrifice others, even those who love them.  Women are
much the same, except that they will go even further than most
men--they will sacrifice everything, even honor, for love."

I watched her face carefully as I spoke, and I thought that I detected
a very faint flush mounting her cheek.  Seeing an opening and an
advantage, I sought to follow it up.

"Take von Schoenvorts, for instance," I continued: "he would doubtless
be glad to die and take us all with him, could he prevent in no other
way the falling of his vessel into enemy hands. He would sacrifice
anyone, even you; and if you still love him, you might be his ready
tool.  Do you understand me?"

She looked at me in wide-eyed consternation for a moment, and then she
went very white and rose from her seat.  "I do," she replied, and
turning her back upon me, she walked quickly toward her room.  I
started to follow, for even believing what I did, I was sorry that I
had hurt her.  I reached the door to the crew's room just behind her
and in time to see von Schoenvorts lean forward and whisper something
to her as she passed; but she must have guessed that she might be
watched, for she passed on.

That afternoon it clouded over; the wind mounted to a gale, and the sea
rose until the craft was wallowing and rolling frightfully. Nearly
everyone aboard was sick; the air became foul and oppressive. For
twenty-four hours I did not leave my post in the conning tower, as both
Olson and Bradley were sick.  Finally I found that I must get a little
rest, and so I looked about for some one to relieve me. Benson
volunteered.  He had not been sick, and assured me that he was a former
R.N. man and had been detailed for submarine duty for over two years.
I was glad that it was he, for I had considerable confidence in his
loyalty, and so it was with a feeling of security that I went below and
lay down.

I slept twelve hours straight, and when I awoke and discovered what I
had done, I lost no time in getting to the conning tower. There sat
Benson as wide awake as could be, and the compass showed that we were
heading straight into the west.  The storm was still raging; nor did it
abate its fury until the fourth day. We were all pretty well done up
and looked forward to the time when we could go on deck and fill our
lungs with fresh air. During the whole four days I had not seen the
girl, as she evidently kept closely to her room; and during this time
no untoward incident had occurred aboard the boat--a fact which seemed
to strengthen the web of circumstantial evidence about her.

For six more days after the storm lessened we still had fairly rough
weather; nor did the sun once show himself during all that time.  For
the season--it was now the middle of June--the storm was unusual; but
being from southern California, I was accustomed to unusual weather.
In fact, I have discovered that the world over, unusual weather
prevails at all times of the year.

We kept steadily to our westward course, and as the U-33 was one of the
fastest submersibles we had ever turned out, I knew that we must be
pretty close to the North American coast.  What puzzled me most was the
fact that for six days we had not sighted a single ship.  It seemed
remarkable that we could cross the Atlantic almost to the coast of the
American continent without glimpsing smoke or sail, and at last I came
to the conclusion that we were way off our course, but whether to the
north or to the south of it I could not determine.

On the seventh day the sea lay comparatively calm at early dawn. There
was a slight haze upon the ocean which had cut off our view of the
stars; but conditions all pointed toward a clear morrow, and I was on
deck anxiously awaiting the rising of the sun.  My eyes were glued upon
the impenetrable mist astern, for there in the east I should see the
first glow of the rising sun that would assure me we were still upon
the right course.  Gradually the heavens lightened; but astern I could
see no intenser glow that would indicate the rising sun behind the
mist.  Bradley was standing at my side.  Presently he touched my arm.

"Look, captain," he said, and pointed south.

I looked and gasped, for there directly to port I saw outlined through
the haze the red top of the rising sun.  Hurrying to the tower, I
looked at the compass.  It showed that we were holding steadily upon
our westward course.  Either the sun was rising in the south, or the
compass had been tampered with.  The conclusion was obvious.

I went back to Bradley and told him what I had discovered. "And," I
concluded, "we can't make another five hundred knots without oil; our
provisions are running low and so is our water. God only knows how far
south we have run."

"There is nothing to do," he replied, "other than to alter our course
once more toward the west; we must raise land soon or we shall all be
lost."

I told him to do so; and then I set to work improvising a crude
with which we finally took our bearings in a rough and most
unsatisfactory manner; for when the work was done, we did not know how
far from the truth the result might be.  It showed us to be about 20ş
north and 30ş west--nearly twenty-five hundred miles off our course.
In short, if our reading was anywhere near correct, we must have been
traveling due south for six days.  Bradley now relieved Benson, for we
had arranged our shifts so that the latter and Olson now divided the
nights, while Bradley and I alternated with one another during the days.

I questioned both Olson and Benson closely in the matter of the
compass; but each stoutly maintained that no one had tampered with it
during his tour of duty.  Benson gave me a knowing smile, as much as to
say:  "Well, you and I know who did this."  Yet I could not believe
that it was the girl.

We kept to our westerly course for several hours when the lookout's cry
announced a sail.  I ordered the U-33's course altered, and we bore
down upon the stranger, for I had come to a decision which was the
result of necessity.  We could not lie there in the middle of the
Atlantic and starve to death if there was any way out of it.  The
sailing ship saw us while we were still a long way off, as was
evidenced by her efforts to escape. There was scarcely any wind,
however, and her case was hopeless; so when we drew near and signaled
her to stop, she came into the wind and lay there with her sails
flapping idly.  We moved in quite close to her.  She was the Balmen of
Halmstad, Sweden, with a general cargo from Brazil for Spain.

I explained our circumstances to her skipper and asked for food, water
and oil; but when he found that we were not German, he became very
angry and abusive and started to draw away from us; but I was in no
mood for any such business.  Turning toward Bradley, who was in the
conning-tower, I snapped out: "Gun-service on deck!  To the diving
stations!"  We had no opportunity for drill; but every man had been
posted as to his duties, and the German members of the crew understood
that it was obedience or death for them, as each was accompanied by a
man with a pistol.  Most of them, though, were only too glad to obey me.

Bradley passed the order down into the ship and a moment later the
gun-crew clambered up the narrow ladder and at my direction trained
their piece upon the slow-moving Swede.  "Fire a shot across her bow,"
I instructed the gun-captain.

Accept it from me, it didn't take that Swede long to see the error of
his way and get the red and white pennant signifying "I understand" to
the masthead.  Once again the sails flapped idly, and then I ordered
him to lower a boat and come after me. With Olson and a couple of the
Englishmen I boarded the ship, and from her cargo selected what we
needed--oil, provisions and water.  I gave the master of the Balmen a
receipt for what we took, together with an affidavit signed by Bradley,
Olson, and myself, stating briefly how we had come into possession of
the U-33 and the urgency of our need for what we took.  We addressed
both to any British agent with the request that the owners of the
Balmen be reimbursed; but whether or not they were, I do not know.

With water, food, and oil aboard, we felt that we had obtained a new
lease of life.  Now, too, we knew definitely where we were, and I
determined to make for Georgetown, British Guiana--but I was destined
to again suffer bitter disappointment.

Six of us of the loyal crew had come on deck either to serve the gun or
board the Swede during our set-to with her; and now, one by one, we
descended the ladder into the centrale.  I was the last to come, and
when I reached the bottom, I found myself looking into the muzzle of a
pistol in the hands of Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts--I saw all my
men lined up at one side with the remaining eight Germans standing
guard over them.


I couldn't imagine how it had happened; but it had.  Later I learned
that they had first overpowered Benson, who was asleep in his bunk, and
taken his pistol from him, and then had found it an easy matter to
disarm the cook and the remaining two Englishmen below.  After that it
had been comparatively simple to stand at the foot of the ladder and
arrest each individual as he descended.

The first thing von Schoenvorts did was to send for me and announce
that as a pirate I was to be shot early the next morning. Then he
explained that the U-33 would cruise in these waters for a time,
sinking neutral and enemy shipping indiscriminately, and looking for
one of the German raiders that was supposed to be in these parts.

He didn't shoot me the next morning as he had promised, and it has
never been clear to me why he postponed the execution of my sentence.
Instead he kept me ironed just as he had been; then he kicked Bradley
out of my room and took it all to himself.

We cruised for a long time, sinking many vessels, all but one by
gunfire, but we did not come across a German raider.  I was surprised
to note that von Schoenvorts often permitted Benson to take command;
but I reconciled this by the fact that Benson appeared to know more of
the duties of a submarine commander than did any of the stupid Germans.

Once or twice Lys passed me; but for the most part she kept to her
room.  The first time she hesitated as though she wished to speak to
me; but I did not raise my head, and finally she passed on. Then one
day came the word that we were about to round the Horn and that von
Schoenvorts had taken it into his fool head to cruise up along the
Pacific coast of North America and prey upon all sorts and conditions
of merchantmen.

"I'll put the fear of God and the Kaiser into them," he said.

The very first day we entered the South Pacific we had an adventure. It
turned out to be quite the most exciting adventure I had ever
encountered.  It fell about this way.  About eight bells of the
forenoon watch I heard a hail from the deck, and presently the
footsteps of the entire ship's company, from the amount of noise I
heard at the ladder.  Some one yelled back to those who had not yet
reached the level of the deck:  "It's the raider, the German raider
Geier!"

I saw that we had reached the end of our rope.  Below all was
quiet--not a man remained.  A door opened at the end of the narrow
hull, and presently Nobs came trotting up to me.  He licked my face and
rolled over on his back, reaching for me with his big, awkward paws.
Then other footsteps sounded, approaching me. I knew whose they were,
and I looked straight down at the flooring. The girl was coming almost
at a run--she was at my side immediately. "Here!" she cried.  "Quick!"
And she slipped something into my hand. It was a key--the key to my
irons.  At my side she also laid a pistol, and then she went on into
the centrale.  As she passed me, I saw that she carried another pistol
for herself.  It did not take me long to liberate myself, and then I
was at her side. "How can I thank you?" I started; but she shut me up
with a word.

"Do not thank me," she said coldly.  "I do not care to hear your thanks
or any other expression from you.  Do not stand there looking at me.  I
have given you a chance to do something--now do it!" The last was a
peremptory command that made me jump.

Glancing up, I saw that the tower was empty, and I lost no time in
clambering up, looking about me.  About a hundred yards off lay a
small, swift cruiser-raider, and above her floated the German
man-of-war's flag.  A boat had just been lowered, and I could see it
moving toward us filled with officers and men. The cruiser lay dead
ahead.  "My," I thought, "what a wonderful targ--" I stopped even
thinking, so surprised and shocked was I by the boldness of my imagery.
The girl was just below me.  I looked down on her wistfully.  Could I
trust her?  Why had she released me at this moment?  I must!  I must!
There was no other way. I dropped back below.  "Ask Olson to step down
here, please," I requested; "and don't let anyone see you ask him."

She looked at me with a puzzled expression on her face for the barest
fraction of a second, and then she turned and went up the ladder.  A
moment later Olson returned, and the girl followed him.  "Quick!" I
whispered to the big Irishman, and made for the bow compartment where
the torpedo-tubes are built into the boat; here, too, were the
torpedoes.  The girl accompanied us, and when she saw the thing I had
in mind, she stepped forward and lent a hand to the swinging of the
great cylinder of death and destruction into the mouth of its tube.
With oil and main strength we shoved the torpedo home and shut the
tube; then I ran back to the conning-tower, praying in my heart of
hearts that the U-33 had not swung her bow away from the prey.  No,
thank God!

Never could aim have been truer.  I signaled back to Olson: "Let 'er
go!"  The U-33 trembled from stem to stern as the torpedo shot from its
tube.  I saw the white wake leap from her bow straight toward the enemy
cruiser.  A chorus of hoarse yells arose from the deck of our own
craft:  I saw the officers stand suddenly erect in the boat that was
approaching us, and I heard loud cries and curses from the raider.
Then I turned my attention to my own business.  Most of the men on the
submarine's deck were standing in paralyzed fascination, staring at the
torpedo. Bradley happened to be looking toward the conning-tower and
saw me.  I sprang on deck and ran toward him.  "Quick!" I whispered.
"While they are stunned, we must overcome them."

A German was standing near Bradley--just in front of him. The
Englishman struck the fellow a frantic blow upon the neck and at the
same time snatched his pistol from its holster. Von Schoenvorts had
recovered from his first surprise quickly and had turned toward the
main hatch to investigate.  I covered him with my revolver, and at the
same instant the torpedo struck the raider, the terrific explosion
drowning the German's command to his men.

Bradley was now running from one to another of our men, and though some
of the Germans saw and heard him, they seemed too stunned for action.

Olson was below, so that there were only nine of us against eight
Germans, for the man Bradley had struck still lay upon the deck. Only
two of us were armed; but the heart seemed to have gone out of the
boches, and they put up but half-hearted resistance. Von Schoenvorts
was the worst--he was fairly frenzied with rage and chagrin, and he
came charging for me like a mad bull, and as he came he discharged his
pistol.  If he'd stopped long enough to take aim, he might have gotten
me; but his pace made him wild, so that not a shot touched me, and then
we clinched and went to the deck.  This left two pistols, which two of
my own men were quick to appropriate.  The Baron was no match for me in
a hand-to-hand encounter, and I soon had him pinned to the deck and the
life almost choked out of him.

A half-hour later things had quieted down, and all was much the same as
before the prisoners had revolted--only we kept a much closer watch on
von Schoenvorts.  The Geier had sunk while we were still battling upon
our deck, and afterward we had drawn away toward the north, leaving the
survivors to the attention of the single boat which had been making its
way toward us when Olson launched the torpedo.  I suppose the poor
devils never reached land, and if they did, they most probably perished
on that cold and unhospitable shore; but I couldn't permit them aboard
the U-33.  We had all the Germans we could take care of.

That evening the girl asked permission to go on deck.  She said that
she felt the effects of long confinement below, and I readily granted
her request.  I could not understand her, and I craved an opportunity
to talk with her again in an effort to fathom her and her intentions,
and so I made it a point to follow her up the ladder.  It was a clear,
cold, beautiful night. The sea was calm except for the white water at
our bows and the two long radiating swells running far off into the
distance upon either hand astern, forming a great V which our
propellers filled with choppy waves.  Benson was in the tower, we were
bound for San Diego and all looked well.

Lys stood with a heavy blanket wrapped around her slender figure, and
as I approached her, she half turned toward me to see who it was. When
she recognized me, she immediately turned away.

"I want to thank you," I said, "for your bravery and loyalty--you were
magnificent.  I am sorry that you had reason before to think that I
doubted you."

"You did doubt me," she replied in a level voice.  "You practically
accused me of aiding Baron von Schoenvorts.  I can never forgive you."

There was a great deal of finality in both her words and tone.

"I could not believe it," I said; "and yet two of my men reported
having seen you in conversation with von Schoenvorts late at night upon
two separate occasions--after each of which some great damage was found
done us in the morning.  I didn't want to doubt you; but I carried all
the responsibility of the lives of these men, of the safety of the
ship, of your life and mine.  I had to watch you, and I had to put you
on your guard against a repetition of your madness."

She was looking at me now with those great eyes of hers, very wide and
round.

"Who told you that I spoke with Baron von Schoenvorts at night, or any
other time?" she asked.

"I cannot tell you, Lys," I replied, "but it came to me from two
different sources."

"Then two men have lied," she asserted without heat.  "I have not
spoken to Baron von Schoenvorts other than in your presence when first
we came aboard the U-33.  And please, when you address me, remember
that to others than my intimates I am Miss La Rue."

Did you ever get slapped in the face when you least expected it? No?
Well, then you do not know how I felt at that moment. I could feel the
hot, red flush surging up my neck, across my cheeks, over my ears,
clear to my scalp.  And it made me love her all the more; it made me
swear inwardly a thousand solemn oaths that I would win her.


  Late in July, 1916, an item in the shipping news mentioned a
Swedish sailing vessel, Balmen, Rio de Janeiro to Barcelona, sunk by a
German raider sometime in June.  A single survivor in an open boat was
picked up off the Cape Verde Islands, in a dying condition. He expired
without giving any details.



Chapter 4

For several days things went along in about the same course. I took our
position every morning with my crude; but the results were
always most unsatisfactory.  They always showed a considerable westing
when I knew that we had been sailing due north. I blamed my crude
instrument, and kept on.  Then one afternoon the girl came to me.

"Pardon me," she said, "but were I you, I should watch this man
Benson--especially when he is in charge."  I asked her what she meant,
thinking I could see the influence of von Schoenvorts raising a
suspicion against one of my most trusted men.

"If you will note the boat's course a half-hour after Benson goes on
duty," she said, "you will know what I mean, and you will understand
why he prefers a night watch.  Possibly, too, you will understand some
other things that have taken place aboard."

Then she went back to her room, thus ending the conversation. I waited
until half an hour after Benson had gone on duty, and then I went on
deck, passing through the conning-tower where Benson sat, and looking
at the compass.  It showed that our course was north by west--that is,
one point west of north, which was, for our assumed position, about
right.  I was greatly relieved to find that nothing was wrong, for the
girl's words had caused me considerable apprehension.  I was about to
return to my room when a thought occurred to me that again caused me to
change my mind--and, incidentally, came near proving my death-warrant.

When I had left the conning-tower little more than a half-hour since,
the sea had been breaking over the port bow, and it seemed to me quite
improbable that in so short a time an equally heavy sea could be
deluging us from the opposite side of the ship--winds may change
quickly, but not a long, heavy sea.  There was only one other
solution--since I left the tower, our course had been altered some
eight points.  Turning quickly, I climbed out upon the conning-tower.
A single glance at the heavens confirmed my suspicions; the
constellations which should have been dead ahead were directly
starboard.  We were sailing due west.

Just for an instant longer I stood there to check up my calculations--I
wanted to be quite sure before I accused Benson of perfidy, and about
the only thing I came near making quite sure of was death.  I cannot
see even now how I escaped it. I was standing on the edge of the
conning-tower, when a heavy palm suddenly struck me between the
shoulders and hurled me forward into space.  The drop to the triangular
deck forward of the conning-tower might easily have broken a leg for
me, or I might have slipped off onto the deck and rolled overboard; but
fate was upon my side, as I was only slightly bruised.  As I came to my
feet, I heard the conning-tower cover slam.  There is a ladder which
leads from the deck to the top of the tower. Up this I scrambled, as
fast as I could go; but Benson had the cover tight before I reached it.

I stood there a moment in dumb consternation.  What did the fellow
intend?  What was going on below?  If Benson was a traitor, how could I
know that there were not other traitors among us? I cursed myself for
my folly in going out upon the deck, and then this thought suggested
another--a hideous one: who was it that had really been responsible for
my being here?

Thinking to attract attention from inside the craft, I again ran down
the ladder and onto the small deck only to find that the steel covers
of the conning-tower windows were shut, and then I leaned with my back
against the tower and cursed myself for a gullible idiot.

I glanced at the bow.  The sea seemed to be getting heavier, for every
wave now washed completely over the lower deck.  I watched them for a
moment, and then a sudden chill pervaded my entire being. It was not
the chill of wet clothing, or the dashing spray which drenched my face;
no, it was the chill of the hand of death upon my heart.  In an instant
I had turned the last corner of life's highway and was looking God
Almighty in the face--the U-33 was being slowly submerged!

It would be difficult, even impossible, to set down in writing my
sensations at that moment.  All I can particularly recall is that I
laughed, though neither from a spirit of bravado nor from hysteria.
And I wanted to smoke.  Lord! how I did want to smoke; but that was out
of the question.

I watched the water rise until the little deck I stood on was awash,
and then I clambered once more to the top of the conning-tower. From
the very slow submergence of the boat I knew that Benson was doing the
entire trick alone--that he was merely permitting the diving-tanks to
fill and that the diving-rudders were not in use. The throbbing of the
engines ceased, and in its stead came the steady vibration of the
electric motors.  The water was halfway up the conning-tower!  I had
perhaps five minutes longer on the deck. I tried to decide what I
should do after I was washed away.  Should I swim until exhaustion
claimed me, or should I give up and end the agony at the first plunge?

From below came two muffled reports.  They sounded not unlike shots.
Was Benson meeting with resistance?  Personally it could mean little to
me, for even though my men might overcome the enemy, none would know of
my predicament until long after it was too late to succor me. The top
of the conning-tower was now awash.  I clung to the wireless mast,
while the great waves surged sometimes completely over me.

I knew the end was near and, almost involuntarily, I did that which I
had not done since childhood--I prayed.  After that I felt better.

I clung and waited, but the water rose no higher.

Instead it receded.  Now the top of the conning-tower received only the
crests of the higher waves; now the little triangular deck below became
visible!  What had occurred within?  Did Benson believe me already
gone, and was he emerging because of that belief, or had he and his
forces been vanquished?  The suspense was more wearing than that which
I had endured while waiting for dissolution.  Presently the main deck
came into view, and then the conning-tower opened behind me, and I
turned to look into the anxious face of Bradley.  An expression of
relief overspread his features.

"Thank God, man!" was all he said as he reached forth and dragged me
into the tower.  I was cold and numb and rather all in. Another few
minutes would have done for me, I am sure, but the warmth of the
interior helped to revive me, aided and abetted by some brandy which
Bradley poured down my throat, from which it nearly removed the
membrane.  That brandy would have revived a corpse.

When I got down into the centrale, I saw the Germans lined up on one
side with a couple of my men with pistols standing over them. Von
Schoenvorts was among them.  On the floor lay Benson, moaning, and
beyond him stood the girl, a revolver in one hand. I looked about,
bewildered.

"What has happened down here?" I asked.  "Tell me!"

Bradley replied.  "You see the result, sir," he said.  "It might have
been a very different result but for Miss La Rue.  We were all asleep.
Benson had relieved the guard early in the evening; there was no one to
watch him--no one but Miss La Rue.  She felt the submergence of the
boat and came out of her room to investigate. She was just in time to
see Benson at the diving rudders.  When he saw her, he raised his
pistol and fired point-blank at her, but he missed and she fired--and
didn't miss.  The two shots awakened everyone, and as our men were
armed, the result was inevitable as you see it; but it would have been
very different had it not been for Miss La Rue.  It was she who closed
the diving-tank sea-cocks and roused Olson and me, and had the pumps
started to empty them."

And there I had been thinking that through her machinations I had been
lured to the deck and to my death!  I could have gone on my knees to
her and begged her forgiveness--or at least I could have, had I not
been Anglo-Saxon.  As it was, I could only remove my soggy cap and bow
and mumble my appreciation.  She made no reply--only turned and walked
very rapidly toward her room. Could I have heard aright?  Was it really
a sob that came floating back to me through the narrow aisle of the
U-33?

Benson died that night.  He remained defiant almost to the last; but
just before he went out, he motioned to me, and I leaned over to catch
the faintly whispered words.

"I did it alone," he said.  "I did it because I hate you--I hate all
your kind.  I was kicked out of your shipyard at Santa Monica. I was
locked out of California.  I am an I. W. W. I became a German
agent--not because I love them, for I hate them too--but because I
wanted to injure Americans, whom I hated more.  I threw the wireless
apparatus overboard.  I destroyed the chronometer and the.  I
devised a scheme for varying the compass to suit my wishes.  I told
Wilson that I had seen the girl talking with von Schoenvorts, and I
made the poor egg think he had seen her doing the same thing.  I am
sorry--sorry that my plans failed. I hate you."

He didn't die for a half-hour after that; nor did he speak
again--aloud; but just a few seconds before he went to meet his Maker,
his lips moved in a faint whisper; and as I leaned closer to catch his
words, what do you suppose I heard?  "Now--I--lay me--down--to--sleep"
That was all; Benson was dead.  We threw his body overboard.

The wind of that night brought on some pretty rough weather with a lot
of black clouds which persisted for several days.  We didn't know what
course we had been holding, and there was no way of finding out, as we
could no longer trust the compass, not knowing what Benson had done to
it.  The long and the short of it was that we cruised about aimlessly
until the sun came out again.  I'll never forget that day or its
surprises.  We reckoned, or rather guessed, that we were somewhere off
the coast of Peru.  The wind, which had been blowing fitfully from the
east, suddenly veered around into the south, and presently we felt a
sudden chill.

"Peru!" snorted Olson.  "When were yez after smellin' iceber-rgs off
Peru?"

Icebergs!  "Icebergs, nothin'!" exclaimed one of the Englishmen. "Why,
man, they don't come north of fourteen here in these waters."

"Then," replied Olson, "ye're sout' of fourteen, me b'y."

We thought he was crazy; but he wasn't, for that afternoon we sighted a
great berg south of us, and we'd been running north, we thought, for
days.  I can tell you we were a discouraged lot; but we got a faint
thrill of hope early the next morning when the lookout bawled down the
open hatch:  "Land!  Land northwest by west!"

I think we were all sick for the sight of land.  I know that I was; but
my interest was quickly dissipated by the sudden illness of three of
the Germans.  Almost simultaneously they commenced vomiting. They
couldn't suggest any explanation for it.  I asked them what they had
eaten, and found they had eaten nothing other than the food cooked for
all of us.  "Have you drunk anything?"  I asked, for I knew that there
was liquor aboard, and medicines in the same locker.

"Only water," moaned one of them.  "We all drank water together this
morning.  We opened a new tank.  Maybe it was the water."

I started an investigation which revealed a terrifying condition--some
one, probably Benson, had poisoned all the running water on the ship.
It would have been worse, though, had land not been in sight.  The
sight of land filled us with renewed hope.

Our course had been altered, and we were rapidly approaching what
appeared to be a precipitous headland.  Cliffs, seemingly rising
perpendicularly out of the sea, faded away into the mist upon either
hand as we approached.  The land before us might have been a continent,
so mighty appeared the shoreline; yet we knew that we must be thousands
of miles from the nearest western land-mass--New Zealand or Australia.

We took our bearings with our crude and inaccurate instruments; we
searched the chart; we cudgeled our brains; and at last it was Bradley
who suggested a solution.  He was in the tower and watching the
compass, to which he called my attention.  The needle was pointing
straight toward the land.  Bradley swung the helm hard to starboard.  I
could feel the U-33 respond, and yet the arrow still clung straight and
sure toward the distant cliffs.

"What do you make of it?" I asked him.

"Did you ever hear of Caproni?" he asked.

"An early Italian navigator?" I returned.

"Yes; he followed Cook about 1721.  He is scarcely mentioned even by
contemporaneous historians--probably because he got into political
difficulties on his return to Italy.  It was the fashion to scoff at
his claims, but I recall reading one of his works--his only one, I
believe--in which he described a new continent in the south seas, a
continent made up of 'some strange metal' which attracted the compass;
a rockbound, inhospitable coast, without beach or harbor, which
extended for hundreds of miles. He could make no landing; nor in the
several days he cruised about it did he see sign of life.  He called it
Caprona and sailed away. I believe, sir, that we are looking upon the
coast of Caprona, uncharted and forgotten for two hundred years."

"If you are right, it might account for much of the deviation of the
compass during the past two days," I suggested.  "Caprona has been
luring us upon her deadly rocks.  Well, we'll accept her challenge.
We'll land upon Caprona.  Along that long front there must be a
vulnerable spot.  We will find it, Bradley, for we must find it.  We
must find water on Caprona, or we must die."

And so we approached the coast upon which no living eyes had ever
rested.  Straight from the ocean's depths rose towering cliffs, shot
with brown and blues and greens--withered moss and lichen and the
verdigris of copper, and everywhere the rusty ocher of iron pyrites.
The cliff-tops, though ragged, were of such uniform height as to
suggest the boundaries of a great plateau, and now and again we caught
glimpses of verdure topping the rocky escarpment, as though bush or
jungle-land had pushed outward from a lush vegetation farther inland to
signal to an unseeing world that Caprona lived and joyed in life beyond
her austere and repellent coast.

But metaphor, however poetic, never slaked a dry throat. To enjoy
Caprona's romantic suggestions we must have water, and so we came in
close, always sounding, and skirted the shore. As close in as we dared
cruise, we found fathomless depths, and always the same undented
coastline of bald cliffs.  As darkness threatened, we drew away and lay
well off the coast all night. We had not as yet really commenced to
suffer for lack of water; but I knew that it would not be long before
we did, and so at the first streak of dawn I moved in again and once
more took up the hopeless survey of the forbidding coast.

Toward noon we discovered a beach, the first we had seen.  It was a
narrow strip of sand at the base of a part of the cliff that seemed
lower than any we had before scanned.  At its foot, half buried in the
sand, lay great boulders, mute evidence that in a bygone age some
mighty natural force had crumpled Caprona's barrier at this point.  It
was Bradley who first called our attention to a strange object lying
among the boulders above the surf.

"Looks like a man," he said, and passed his glasses to me.

I looked long and carefully and could have sworn that the thing I saw
was the sprawled figure of a human being.  Miss La Rue was on deck with
us.  I turned and asked her to go below.  Without a word she did as I
bade.  Then I stripped, and as I did so, Nobs looked questioningly at
me.  He had been wont at home to enter the surf with me, and evidently
he had not forgotten it.

"What are you going to do, sir?" asked Olson.

"I'm going to see what that thing is on shore," I replied. "If it's a
man, it may mean that Caprona is inhabited, or it may merely mean that
some poor devils were shipwrecked here. I ought to be able to tell from
the clothing which is more near the truth.

"How about sharks?" queried Olson.  "Sure, you ought to carry a knoife."

"Here you are, sir," cried one of the men.

It was a long slim blade he offered--one that I could carry between my
teeth--and so I accepted it gladly.

"Keep close in," I directed Bradley, and then I dived over the side and
struck out for the narrow beach.  There was another splash directly
behind me, and turning my head, I saw faithful old Nobs swimming
valiantly in my wake.

The surf was not heavy, and there was no undertow, so we made shore
easily, effecting an equally easy landing.  The beach was composed
largely of small stones worn smooth by the action of water.  There was
little sand, though from the deck of the U-33 the beach had appeared to
be all sand, and I saw no evidences of mollusca or crustacea such as
are common to all beaches I have previously seen.  I attribute this to
the fact of the smallness of the beach, the enormous depth of
surrounding water and the great distance at which Caprona lies from her
nearest neighbor.

As Nobs and I approached the recumbent figure farther up the beach, I
was appraised by my nose that whether man or not, the thing had once been
organic and alive, but that for some time it had been dead.  Nobs
halted, sniffed and growled.  A little later he sat down upon his
haunches, raised his muzzle to the heavens and bayed forth a most
dismal howl.  I shied a small stone at him and bade him shut up--his
uncanny noise made me nervous.  When I had come quite close to the
thing, I still could not say whether it had been man or beast.  The
carcass was badly swollen and partly decomposed.  There was no sign of
clothing upon or about it.  A fine, brownish hair covered the chest and
abdomen, and the face, the palms of the hands, the feet, the shoulders
and back were practically hairless.  The creature must have been about
the height of a fair sized man; its features were similar to those of a
man; yet had it been a man?

I could not say, for it resembled an ape no more than it did a man.
Its large toes protruded laterally as do those of the semiarboreal
peoples of Borneo, the Philippines and other remote regions where low
types still persist.  The countenance might have been that of a cross
between Pithecanthropus, the Java ape-man, and a daughter of the
Piltdown race of prehistoric Sussex. A wooden cudgel lay beside the
corpse.

Now this fact set me thinking.  There was no wood of any description in
sight.  There was nothing about the beach to suggest a wrecked mariner.
There was absolutely nothing about the body to suggest that it might
possibly in life have known a maritime experience.  It was the body of
a low type of man or a high type of beast.  In neither instance would
it have been of a seafaring race.  Therefore I deduced that it was
native to Caprona--that it lived inland, and that it had fallen or been
hurled from the cliffs above.  Such being the case, Caprona was
inhabitable, if not inhabited, by man; but how to reach the inhabitable
interior!  That was the question.  A closer view of the cliffs than had
been afforded me from the deck of the U-33 only confirmed my conviction
that no mortal man could scale those perpendicular heights; there was
not a finger-hold, not a toe-hold, upon them.  I turned away baffled.

Nobs and I met with no sharks upon our return journey to the submarine.
My report filled everyone with theories and speculations, and with
renewed hope and determination.  They all reasoned along the same lines
that I had reasoned--the conclusions were obvious, but not the water.
We were now thirstier than ever.

The balance of that day we spent in continuing a minute and fruitless
exploration of the monotonous coast.  There was not another break in
the frowning cliffs--not even another minute patch of pebbly beach.  As
the sun fell, so did our spirits. I had tried to make advances to the
girl again; but she would have none of me, and so I was not only
thirsty but otherwise sad and downhearted.  I was glad when the new day
broke the hideous spell of a sleepless night.

The morning's search brought us no shred of hope.  Caprona was
impregnable--that was the decision of all; yet we kept on.  It must
have been about two bells of the afternoon watch that Bradley called my
attention to the branch of a tree, with leaves upon it, floating on the
sea.  "It may have been carried down to the ocean by a river," he
suggested.

"Yes," I replied, "it may have; it may have tumbled or been thrown off
the top of one of these cliffs."

Bradley's face fell.  "I thought of that, too," he replied, "but I
wanted to believe the other."

"Right you are!" I cried.  "We must believe the other until we prove it
false.  We can't afford to give up heart now, when we need heart most.
The branch was carried down by a river, and we are going to find that
river." I smote my open palm with a clenched fist, to emphasize a
determination unsupported by hope. "There!" I cried suddenly.  "See
that, Bradley?"  And I pointed at a spot closer to shore.  "See that,
man!"  Some flowers and grasses and another leafy branch floated toward
us.  We both scanned the water and the coastline.  Bradley evidently
discovered something, or at least thought that he had.  He called down
for a bucket and a rope, and when they were passed up to him, he
lowered the former into the sea and drew it in filled with water.  Of
this he took a taste, and straightening up, looked into my eyes with an
expression of elation--as much as to say "I told you so!"

"This water is warm," he announced, "and fresh!"

I grabbed the bucket and tasted its contents.  The water was very warm,
and it was fresh, but there was a most unpleasant taste to it.

"Did you ever taste water from a stagnant pool full of tadpoles?"
Bradley asked.

"That's it," I exclaimed, "--that's just the taste exactly, though I
haven't experienced it since boyhood; but how can water from a flowing
stream, taste thus, and what the dickens makes it so warm?  It must be
at least 70 or 80 Fahrenheit, possibly higher."

"Yes," agreed Bradley, "I should say higher; but where does it come
from?"

"That is easily discovered now that we have found it," I answered. "It
can't come from the ocean; so it must come from the land. All that we
have to do is follow it, and sooner or later we shall come upon its
source."

We were already rather close in; but I ordered the U-33's prow turned
inshore and we crept slowly along, constantly dipping up the water and
tasting it to assure ourselves that we didn't get outside the
fresh-water current.  There was a very light off-shore wind and
scarcely any breakers, so that the approach to the shore was continued
without finding bottom; yet though we were already quite close, we saw
no indication of any indention in the coast from which even a tiny
brooklet might issue, and certainly no mouth of a large river such as
this must necessarily be to freshen the ocean even two hundred yards
from shore.  The tide was running out, and this, together with the
strong flow of the freshwater current, would have prevented our going
against the cliffs even had we not been under power; as it was we had
to buck the combined forces in order to hold our position at all.  We
came up to within twenty-five feet of the sheer wall, which loomed high
above us. There was no break in its forbidding face.  As we watched the
face of the waters and searched the cliff's high face, Olson suggested
that the fresh water might come from a submarine geyser.  This, he
said, would account for its heat; but even as he spoke a bush, covered
thickly with leaves and flowers, bubbled to the surface and floated off
astern.

"Flowering shrubs don't thrive in the subterranean caverns from which
geysers spring," suggested Bradley.
